	Psychology is the scientific study of the human mind and its functions, especially those affecting behavior. More specific to the topic of this paper, marriage psychology is the study of how two humans think and act towards or with each other. I became interested in this topic when it was presented to me in my psychology lecture. I wanted to become apart of the scientific conversations and research studies trying to help improve or fix marriages. While researching these topics, I found out how big of an impact divorce had, not only on the couple, but on their families and everyone around them. Children however, are the ones who are affected the most. With mass research already providing data on how divorce affects younger children, I had a very limited amount of resources that studied how divorce affected young adults around the age of 18. After sorting through what sources I had regarding the effects of divorce on young adults, I found that they were referred to as the “silent victims of divorce”. This means that people tend to forget about the impact the divorce may have had on them, thinking that they should be old enough to know how to deal with it or cope by themselves. However, they are still young enough to be dramatically shaped by it, but old enough to pretend they aren’t hurt. Concluding results from my analysis provide me with evidence that young adults’ view of marriage or relationships are drastically influenced if they have experienced a parental divorce in their younger adult years, which in turn, will decrease the amount of people getting married in the future.	I began my research viewing an academic journal by Angela Haig called “The Impact of Recent Parental Divorce on Children of All Ages”. This journal gave me a lot of insight on children that were affected by divorce. She prepared a study that would watch and research divorced families and their children. Her results proved to her that children in divorced homes consistently had behavioral and relationship problems. After examining that journal, I found another research article by Phyllis A. Lembke, “Effects of Late in Life Parental Divorce on the Young Adults Future Relationships”, which was similar to Haig’s except that it mainly focused on young adults. The study in this paper was centered around young adults through their eyes. It really caught and captured the adult children’s perspective on things. At the end of her study, she concluded that 7 out of 10 participants would stay away from marriage. She learned that these adult children affected by divorce were not willing to put themselves through the hurt they saw their parents go through. Throughout her article, she references other psychologists and studies. This opened me up to the very limited amount of research done on the effects of divorce on adult children. 	After reviewing those articles brought to my attention through Lembke, I found that Paul R. Amato was one of the first psychologists to study the affects of divorce on adult children. While researching and studying divorce in 2000, he found and made the general statement that there was a direct relationship between parental divorce and the long reaching affects on adult children. Influenced by Amato’s research; F. Jonsson, U. Njarovik, G. Olafsdottir, and S. Gretarsson, came up with a study providing us with exact effects of divorce on adult children. These effects included increased number of short lived affairs, having love affairs at a younger age, having a greater number of sexual partners, and avoiding commitment in any type of long term relationship. 	Soon after that research came out, a spin off study of that was done by Ms. Annalise Corak and Nicholas Wolfinger. In 2001, Corak researched young adults of divorce who actually ended up getting married. Her results concluded that these individuals experienced a great deal of marital instability like continuous fighting or even divorce. Wolfinger, in 2003, concluded that if a young adult affected by divorce remained single past the age of 20, then they are very likely to avoid getting married at all. However, in 2007, Svein Olav Daatland, a Norwegian social researcher and psychologist, made a claim that was based off all of this information. He stated that in the future, divorce rates will not increase. However, the rate will not increase because the number of people getting married will decrease.	After weeks of reading through research on marriage psychology and revising my claim multiple times, I have found ways to advance and update Svein Daatlands claim and turn it into one of my own. I am going to provide evidence from other psychologists and make claims of my own to alter Svein Daatlands stance. Results from my analysis on all the information and studies I have read, have provided me with enough evidence to state that young adults’ view of marriage or relationships are drastically influenced if they have experienced a parental divorce in their young adult years. This will provide evidence advancing Svein Daatlands claim that the amount of people getting married will decrease, making the percentage of divorce decrease as well. In the 1980’s, the average divorce rate was 50%. However, contrary to popular belief, the divorce rate in the last twenty years has dramatically decreased (Leonhardt, 2014). In the 2000’s, it had dropped to 20%. Why has it dropped so much? 	To begin, we need to know about the baby boomer generation. Between the years of 1946 and 1964, almost exactly nine months after World War II ended came “the cries of the babies”. During this time around three million babies were born. So, when the baby boomer generation was growing up they were influenced by their parents to marry young and start a family as soon as possible just like they had done while they were growing up. Arielle Kuperberg, a graduate student at the University of Pennsylvania, stated that younger married couples were more likely to divorce since they are still too immature to rationally think about the future. I also believe that couples back then had a disadvantage regarding social issues. For instance, it was very frowned upon to live together before marriage. This is a setback because you don’t get the chance to see what happens between your relationships when you are forced to be around each other constantly. With so many divorces taking place around the 80’s and 90’s, children were affected. Recently stated, young adults impacted by their parent’s divorces were highly affected. The psychological learning stage of Intimacy vs. Isolation happens within the years of these young adults lives. This stage can be described as the conflict people face in learning how to give and receive love in a close or long-term relationship. During this stage, you begin to build committed relationships or find years fearing intimacy. While the child is going through this stage, and their parents, who could also be considered role models, are going through very devastating times, getting a divorce, then they are not going to want to put themselves through that same hurt (Lembke, 2006). Results from many studies previous discussed, show us the long lasting affects divorce has on young adults. The most commonly discussed effect it has is that these adult children of divorce will stay away from marriage or any type of committed relationship. With the increase of divorces happening in the 80’s and 90’s, it has negatively impacted adult children of those families and scared them away from any type of relationship. This leads me to believe that the divorce rate is decreasing but mainly due to the fact that not as many people are getting married as quickly or getting married at all anymore. 	Earlier studies of divorce have only concentrated on young children and the short term effects it had on them. It wasn’t until recently that psychologist began to notice and research the studies of long term affects divorce has on adult children. After analyzing articles, studies, and previous research, I came to the conclusion that young adults’ view of marriage or relationships are highly persuaded if they have experienced a parental divorce in their younger adult years. Because they have been so negatively affected, they are not getting married as early or often dropping the divorce rate. Instead, these affected young adults that still want relationships wait until they are in their later years to get married because they are more mature and can make better decisions. On the other hand, the rest of the young adults that don’t want to get married will continue to live their lives by themselves avoiding any type of commitment. However, some people may say that these young adults who have been affected and are choosing to stay away from commitment need to realize that they are putting themselves in self-imposed isolation. I can counter this by saying that we, as outsiders, have no idea how they are feeling and being impacted until we are in that situation. Although, research does provide ample situations where no matter the amount of help, they will always be scared of commitment. If this problem is not fixed there will be drastic ramifications. These may include huge decreases in the amount of people getting married, which then leads to a decrease in the amount of children being born into stable homes. The affects of divorce on adult children is still a very new and recent topic for psychologists, but with further research and studies maybe they can provide a solution that will help those that have and will be affected change their perspective on relationships. What type of counseling will they need to undergo in order to see marriage as attainable? When will they find enough research to help them figure this out?   Project 3	On January 8th, 2002, the President of The United Sates of America, George W. Bush, passed the No Child Left Behind Act. Many people agree that it is the most over taking education-reform since President Lyndon Baines Johnson passed the Elementary and Secondary Education Act in 1965. And on the other hand, others believe it is destroying our education system. The No Child Left Behind Act increased the government’s role in producing a high quality of public education for the students in America by making schools responsible for their student’s growth, mandating standardized testing in math and reading every year, emphasizing higher success for the minorities and the less fortunate, and stressing funding towards the poor school districts across the States. The main position of No Child Left Behind is the requirement that schools in all states across the country must develop challenging and stimulating academic standards in order for students to reach proficiency. Describing NCLB’s demands, Dobbs states, “Starting in the 2013-2014 school year, 100% of the students must pass a science assessment for schools to meet Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in accordance to No Child Left Behind” (Dobbs 1). Since this is just one requirement from the government to the states, the teacher’s seem to teach based on the standardized test rather than teaching the objectives. Therefore, this creates a harmful effect among students, teachers, and schools of America. Michael Bugeja, from The Chronicle, states, “We should be teaching our students to think creatively or to become innovators, not just test takers” (Bugeja 1). By teachers pushing the students to become imaginative and attentive will create a better learning experience among all schoolchildren. According to the requirements through the No Child Left Behind Act, I believe that in order to reach these desired test scores; technology should be used in ways to benefit a student’s desired learning style.	No Child Left Behind emphasizes the use of Technology in order for the students of America to excel. According to Bugeja, distractions are unacceptable, therefor proposing the solution to turn off all technology in a classroom. But, the benefits truly do out weight the costs. While Bugeja believes technology should be demolished due to the distractions is produces, Professor Woodrow from Baylor University believes it is changing our school systems for the better by writing, “Computer-Assisted Instruction (CAI) has made an impact and will continue to affect the manner in which students are taught, with greater emphasis given to concept development and to problem solving and with less emphasis placed on basic skills” (Woodrow 1).  The use of technology is supposed to enhance, and currently is, the lessons taught to the students within a class. Having NCLB integrated into our school systems has helped technology make its way into teaching techniques all across America. But in order for teachers to carry out such a difficult task, they must acquire some sort of knowledge on how to use technology to teach their students.  	No Child Left Behind strongly advices for teachers, principles, and other school staff to be educated on the use of technology so they can use it effectively. Unfortunately, some people, like Jeffrey Young from The Chronicle, are in support of limiting technology. He says, “Students say technology actually makes some of their [teachers] less effective than they would be if they stuck to a lecture at the chalkboard” (Young 1). If this is the case for most students, then it is most likely because their teacher has not undergone assistance to understand and effectively implement technology into their curriculum. Time can be easily wasted when it comes to teaching. By offering teachers and school staff with instructions by professionals, it will allow class time to be accomplishing and worthy of every single second. In order for teachers to allow integration to happen, technology must be used resourcefully and must support literacy skill development while being infused into the curriculum. But for these concepts to work, the training of teachers must be based on instructional methods that are accessed continuously through the electronic media provided to a school. In response to Bugeia, Tally argues teachers have a huge role in the learning process by stating, “Teachers play a critical role in the implementation of technology. They are expected not only to teach with technology but also to guide students’ experiences with technology as part of routine classroom activities” (Tally 5). Teaching technology seems to be a two way process. If teachers invest time into understanding the devices that are being used in the curriculum, results will show through the students. But in order for this to happen, professional development is a must. Reel from Royal Roads University writes, “When pedagogical technology skills are lacking, due to an absence of training or professional development, teachers will not be able to make connections with technology and ultimately will not be able to enhance student learning through technology” (Reel 1). With the correct professional instruction provided to teachers, the integration of technology put into a curriculum seems to improve classroom atmospheres.		With technology being incorporated into the schools curriculum, it allows for students to have upbeat and optimistic attitudes. Kulik, in Tejinder Reel’s article, discovered information that stated, “Students liked their classes more, developed more positive attitudes about instruction, and learned more in less time when they received computer-based instruction” (Reel 1). These positive attitudes and encouraging atmospheres are happening because the students, teachers, and technology devices are all working together in an equilibrium. One thing about technology in schools is that it will keep advancing onto bigger and better ways of teaching kids. Instead of focusing on progression, the schools should focus on technology being applied to everyone with different types of learning styles. Currently some teachers are implementing technology in one way when it needs to be used for all different types of learning styles.	Most believe that there are only three major types of learning styles. To get a general understanding for a solution to the negative effects of the technology used through the NCLB, technology must be applied to the three main learning styles; auditory, visual, kinesthetic. A person who prefers the auditory learning style must hear things for them to understand and have the greatest chance at learning and succeeding. In Woodrow’s piece, he quotes the LSI manual and states how auditory learners work well with tapes, videotapes, lectures, discussions, records, radio, stereos, television, and precise oral directions or explanations. On the other hand, visual learners are successful and learn best when they see information from things such as handouts, taking notes, screens, whiteboards, textbooks, and worksheets. Lastly, the kinesthetic learners understand information better when they have a sense of touch rather than seeing or doing. They must be active or involved and find it hard to stay still for a prolonged period of time. Resources they may use should be movable and touchable. All three of these main learning techniques must be understood by the students in order to be carried out in a positive and effective way. “The more knowledgeable and comfortable students are about their own learning style, the more they will share responsibility with teachers for learning” (Woodrow 49). If teachers can understand the specialized and preferred learning styles among their classroom, the student’s knowledge and success can only increase even further than it already has. Technology should enhance and support learning through the three main learning styles, rather than serving as a specific learning technique among all students in a classroom. 	In order for technology to easily and efficiently better a students learning experience that has a preferred learning style, different devices, practices, and certain methods must be used in order to carry out the procedure successfully. Through the NCLB act, technology has advanced students learning experiences, but it could easily be more effective if it was geared towards the specific learning types. For instance, since kinesthetic learners learn best when they are actively doing something. One example is taking notes or doing worksheets while a teacher lectures off of a PowerPoint. By taking notes, the student is actively writing down the information that is being taught by the teacher. Also, the use of clickers is a great hand on device that promotes technology correctly. Writer, Michael E. Lantz, agrees with this by saying:	“Hand raising and holding up a response card may increase the number of students that 	respond in-class. However, many students may still feel that responding is too public and 	fail to respond. [The] use of clickers led to greater class participation than either hand 	raising 	or response cards . . .” (Lantz 557).A student with kinesthetic learning would be so much more involved if they use their hands to click in answers and being apart of full participation rather than waiting to be called on while they are raising their hand. Such activities similar to these through the use of technology will benefit the No Child Lift behind act towards kinesthetic learners.	Technology also should be used in ways to teach not only kinesthetic but visual learners as well. The visual learner learns best when they observe certain objects that are given, such as images, pictures, colors and other types of media. Some changes and constant strategies that teachers could use to benefit the visual learner through technology seem to be endless. One way to teach is by using YouTube and other video sites to display clips that help the visual learners understand concepts better. These clips allow the students to visually see things that the teacher wants to teach them. Another example is using PowerPoint’s and Prezi applications. These technology applications allow the teacher to design an attractive slide show while filling each slide with an abundant amount of information. Two Authors who write for Journal of Managerial Psychology discuss the importance of details by saying, “. . . if educators demand that the learners pay close attention to detail in their writing but their attire is very sloppy, their handouts are hard to read, then the visual preference of the learner is not satisfied; that is, the educators are not communicating visually what they believe - the importance of attention to details” (Neck 1). If designed PowerPoint’s and Prezi’s are designed in the visual learners favor, which is normally eye-catching and nice-looking, the student will learn to their best ability. Besides, who doesn’t love an attractive way of learning? 	Lastly, auditory learning should be adapted to the technology used in the No Child Left Behind act as well. Again, auditory learners must only hear things for them to have the best chance at learning. There are a number of different types of devices of technology that can be used for auditory learners. There are also numerous different kinds of applications and online textbooks that read a text from a book out loud. This is helpful to the auditory learner because not only allows them to hear someone else reading the text, but they can follow along since these programs are designed for their excellent variety of tones of voice and easy to follow along pace. Plus, this is easy for the teachers to start planning activities in the future, grade papers, or getting work that needs to be done as soon as possible. There are also helpful programs that do pronunciations for words that students don’t quite understand. This is very beneficial because it teaches the students on how to pronounce words correctly from there on out. Again, PowerPoints, Prezi‘s and other programs like these are also great because the teacher, or a student presenter, can lecture during any kind of these presentations. Technology can be easily taught to all auditory learners if applied correctly. 		The No Child Left Behind Act does indeed have its weaknesses and its strengths. A major strength is its use of technology. According to NCLB, technology is being used to improve test scores to be proficient among the students of America. While some believe that the progression of technology is the only way to complete this, I state that implementing certain technology devices and programs into the curriculum to teach kids is crucial. Not only because they are fascinating and educational, but also because they can be geared towards the three main intelligences; kinesthetic, visual, and auditory. If instructors teach through technology to gear towards individual success and improvement rather than to meet a desired test score by the government, the students will be able to figure out their strengths and weaknesses through the techniques used. Isn’t that what we want in our school systems? To have individual success for future scenarios rather than good test scores during the younger years of life? By teaching technology like this, we may find out certain programs that are more preferred over others as well as new intelligences that may be discovered. Learning experience is crucial in the younger years. It would only be logical to teach to benefit each individual student. The Future of Nanotechnology	The study of nanotechnology has been around for quite some time, since the 1980s. It was during this time that scientists could finally see atoms for the first time and manipulate each tiny one. To understand what nanotechnology really is, it is essential to know that a nanometer is one billionth of a meter. A sheet of paper, for example, is 100,000 nanometers thick; that’s how tiny they are. Nanoparticles are defined as particles with sizes ranging from one to one hundred nanometers. These are the heart of nanotechnology. The diversity and uniqueness in size, shape, medium, and chemical nature of these are the reason why nanotechnology is fundamental to the field of science. So overall, nanotechnology is defined as the engineering of functional materials at an atomic or molecular scale (Stemp-Morlock A146). Science, research and development, and technology have advanced significantly within the past years. Nanotechnology happens to be the greatest engineering development since the Industrial Revolution. A report called “New Dimensions for Manufacturing: A UK Strategy for Nanotechnology” stated “Nanotechnology is about new ways of making things. It promises more for less: smaller, cheaper, lighter and faster devices with greater functionality, using less raw material and consuming less energy” (Anderson 160). As long as guidelines are followed, the research of nanotechnology should be furthered. We are the future. We must keep developing. But with this remarkable innovation comes fear and distress.	One of the main concerns with advancing the research of nanotechnology is the fact that us humans will constantly be exposing ourselves to these tiny nanoparticles. This is a significant matter because the atoms/molecules are on the surface of the particle rather than in the interior. Ultrafine particles (UFPs), for example, are “nanometer-size particles that have not been intentionally produced but are the incidental products of process” (Gwinn & Vallyathan 1818). They can carry large amounts of pollutants and can be anywhere in the air for several days. Inhaling ultrafine particles can lead to the development of disease and systemic health problems (Schwartz, Weis, Wilson A650). Examples of important health issues that have been related back to nanoparticles are cardiovascular and pulmonary mortality and toxicity to other organs. In 2002, a study of rats was exposed to inhalations. It was reported that a “significant amount of 13C (a natural isotope of carbon that makes up only about one percent of all natural carbon on earth) accumulated in the liver within 30 minutes postinhalation” (Gwinn 1823). With that, it can lead to translocation to organs in the body, which is a chromosome abnormality. It can also lead to clot formation and the start of cardiopulmonary problems (Gwinn 1823). Other recorded major health effects include decreased lung function, respiratory infections, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (Gwinn 1822). These health problems are seen as a threat to the population. But with further research of nanoparticles and nanomaterials, scientists can discover more information about the health effects. Useful and viable products can then be designed. 	Workers who are willing to expose themselves to nanoparticles are taught the ethical and scientific guidelines. In order to keep the workplace safe, they must be knowledgeable of nanoparticle hazards and controls and be able to identify and communicate them. Engineers and researchers are required to spend an investment of their time doing toxicological and control research. That is because further research is needed to gain more information about the health effects associated with nanotechnology (Schulte & Salamanca-Buentello 10). To keep the workers safe, the exposure to nanoparticles is minimized by rotating workers. Also, medical screenings are given to make sure each and every employee is not at risk of disease (Schulte 9). If workers who are around nanoparticles all the time remain in somewhat good condition, the rest of the population should not be as affected. Following these safety guidelines, the future of nanotechnology research should potentially go on. Many scientists and researchers are aware that nanoparticles are hazardous to people’s health and the environment. Several groups have come up with goals to moderate the risks and dangers and have funded for health research in nanotechnology. A program called the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) is seeking ways to reduce the “weight of pollution and of greenhouse gases in industrial manufacturing processes in order to preserve a clean environment” (Karn & Wong 3). Green Nanotechnology wants to make a change in the development of nanotechnology by “either eliminating or minimizing harmful polluting substances in the synthesis of nanomaterials or using the products of nanotechnology to eliminate or minimize these pollutants in current chemical processes” (Karn 3). Along with these goals are funds that are primarily used to educate the public on what nanotechnology is. For example, by 2005, the government was “already spending at least $30 million a year” on informational presentations for kindergarteners and up (Munro 2). Funding is also being used “for environmental, health, and safety research in nanotechnology” which “has grown from $34.8 million in 2005 to $58.6 million in 2008” (Stemp-Morlock A146). Although setting goals and having funds does not directly solve the problem of nanoparticles polluting the air and affecting our health systems, it is indeed a good start. With professional and well-educated scientists and engineers, we should have sustainable nano-products sooner or later.	Since 2007, we have had over 470 products that include some form of nanotechnology. Even before then, there were $32 billion worth of products sold that incorporated some kind of nanotechnology (Nagarajan 10). Consumer products varied from “needs in health care and fitness, home and garden, electronics and computers, food and beverage, automotive, appliances, and products for children” (Nagarajan 10). Examples include fungicides, anti-scratch coated tiles, skin creams with antioxidant vitamins, electronic circuits, and wear resistant coatings (Nagarajan 12). These are very useful products, but the problem is that the manipulation/production of the nanoparticles is not safe for the environment; therefore the overall production is a bust. Groups such as Green Nanotechnology and researchers now are trying to develop ways to make the production of these products more environmental friendly. When that is solved, nanotechnology can go further, potentially changing and saving lives.The real future of nanotechnology is primarily in the medical field. Such innovations include targeted drug delivery, detection of tumors, and one step closer to curing cancer (Gwinn 1819). It has already been found that “targeted encapsulated drug delivery using nanoparticles is more effective for improved bioavailability, minimal side effects, decreased toxicity to other organs, and is less costly” (Gwinn 1819). The drug dose frequency was also decreased. Back in January of 2000, President Clinton spoke at the California Institute of Technology and brought up the idea of nanotechnology. He said to the crowd, “Imagine the possibilities. Materials with ten times the strength of steel and only a small fraction of the weight – shrinking all the information housed at the Library of Congress into a device the size of a sugar cube – detecting cancerous tumors when they are only a few cells in size” (Anderson 156). Three years later, in 2004, a mice study was reported that showed that magnetic iron nanoparticles covered in antibody helped to heat and burn tumors (Gwinn 1819). This could be considered a great example of advancement in nanotechnology. One other goal that is listed in the US nanotechnology and nanoscience policy says “The human body will be more durable, healthier, more energetic, easier to repair, and more resistant to stress, biological threats and aging processes” (Anderson 156). To achieve that goal would be a life-changing miracle for tons of people. It is one of the many reasons why nanotechnology research should proceed far until great history in the field of science is made again. Nanotechnology is said to be the greatest engineering/scientific innovation as of today. Being able to manipulate such tiny atoms/molecules/particles since the 1980s has allowed engineers and scientists do the amazing research that they do now. It is no doubt that we have gone so far with technology and science. We are now the future. It is our job to keep science going until we find the next big theory or hypothesis for the next generation. The myriad of impacts that nanotechnology has and could have are life changing for all. A numerous amount of studies have been done and consumer products associated with nanomaterials have been made and sold since the beginning of nanotechnology. Although there is no solid solution, yet, to the exposure of polluting nanoparticles, scientists and engineers are going step by step to reach their various goals with nanotechnology. Finding a way to assemble nanoparticles in a sustainable matter is definitely one that they have been working on. From there, nanotechnology will not be a hazard anymore and the research shall go on. As Sally Tinkle, a senior science advisor in the Office of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, states, “Nanomaterials hold incredible promise to solve significant world problems, like the need for energy and clean water” (Stemp-Morlock A146). Welcome to the world of nanotechnology. Protecting against Cyberattacks	Over the course of the past couple of decades, everyone around the world uses computers. When someone is buying something and uses a credit card or a debit card they’re using some type of computer that goes from their card to the banks system. Every system has a fault because there’s always a way to counter a system and because of this fault it is possible for cyberattacks to happen. While the world is getting closer and closer to the advance technology age it needs to buckle down and prepare for cyberattacks. This means that everything that has a system will need to be able to defend against cyberattacks. It is impossible to stop cyberattacks because there is always a way to break in, but with education and practice on protecting yourself online, you could stop most cyberattacks. 	While digging around the internet I found multiple articles talking on the topic of the importance of protecting against cyberattacks. One of the articles called the “Cyberattacks May Constitute Acts of War” by Ed Oswald, goes on to talk about how cyberterrorism is a big issue and the frequency is increasing as time goes on. The article says the attacks are a big issue but Oswald later goes on to talk about how few attacks really do damage. While reading about an article called “Critical infrastructure ‘unprepared’ for cyberattacks” by Antony Savvas, it mentions that companies were not prepared for cyberattacks and the other that were thought they would end up being attacked in less than a year. It also says that even the companies that had protection ended up having found things that would ruin their systems. It is said that it was a certain form of malware and they all ended up having it.  The next article is called “Cyberattacks: Computer Warfare Looms as Next Big Conflict in International Law” by Richard Brust, which talks about the same malware from the Critical infrastructure. This goes on to talk about what exactly this malware would do to computers and how in the future what could happen if the same thing were to happen again in the future. It is split into four different topics in this article, it goes from the malware and what it does to a history lesson about this malware. In this history lesson it is basically saying that the U.S needs to prepare for cyberattacks so something like this doesn’t happen again. After that Brust talks about how the world was before cyberattacks and why the U.S needs to protect before it lets something like the 1930s air war happens but in a digital age. It compared the 1930s air war because the fights in the sky where brand new and someone had to take control just like now but with computer. Then Brust talks about how the malware they sent could be called an act of war. This is just like the article from before where it is an issue that is on the rise and something that needs to be dealt with. The article called “’Bullet time’ to stop cyber-attacks on power grids” by Paul Marks uses the movie “The matrix” to compare a rather famous scene to what will be happening in the computer to prevent cyberattacks. Marks says it will slow down the cyberattack then defend against it, this is called the Hyper-solution. Throughout the article it talks about how the hyper-solution would work and compares it to real life situations. While it is talking about the situations it is also talking about much it would cost to make something like this. It then goes on to say that it most likely wouldn’t be able to block something the Stuxnet attack. This links all the articles together because they all have the cyberattack called Stuxnet which is one of the biggest cyberattacks that has ever happen. In the last article called “Cyberattacks: A clear and present danger”, it talks about how many everyday things we use technology for and talks about how we should protect against it. Again, it talks about the Stuxnet attack and talks a little more on what exactly it is and what it does. It talks more about what happen and what potentially could happen but it doesn’t offer a way to combat it. It gives great in depth on how cyberattacks can affect people that don’t really use technology and says how the whole world can be impacted by a cyberattacks. It just ends by saying “The era of serious cyberterrorism may not be far away” (Cyberattacks). From that last sentence all I can get from it is it saying that it’s not something you can avoid, that it’s going to happen. 	Why it isn’t possible and what cyberattacks are	There are many different types of cyberattack. By definition a cyberattack is an attempt by hackers to damage or destroy a computer network or system. This can be done by using malicious code to alter computer code, logic or data, resulting in disruptive consequences that can compromise data and lead to cybercrimes, such as information and identity theft (Techopedias). Now to think about cyberattack using a real life example you could say that the computer network or system is a house. Like a normal house there are many ways to enter it but they are normally locked. A hacker is the person that tries to break into it and steal what’s on the inside. Just like that a computer network or system can always be broken into. Now just like with your house it is possible to protect yourself from someone breaking in. There are firewalls, malware defenders and virus protectors that can be used. The education people need to protect themselves from lower level cyberattacks are very basic. The things that they can do are very simple from not clicking on link in emails. This is because the links could take you to a site that has an encrypted worm that will destroy your computer. This goes the same for emails with attachments in it. There are also emails that will ask for personal information for surveys or winning something. These are things you are supposed to avoid because this is your personal information you are handling over to someone. The rule of thumb is that if the email you are receiving isn’t from someone you know or something you were expecting, be very wary of it. Most of the lower cyberattacks can be avoided just by following those rules. If someone falls for one of these attempts to get into their system or info it could result in identity theft, charges on credit cards, or getting a system takeover. 	There are a lot more to protecting yourself online. There is downloadable content on websites and when people are trying to download these many people don’t find the download button because there are advertisements that display a download button to get you to download something else. These are often times more cyberattacks in the form of worms that will corrupt your system or key log you which is when someone can see everything you’re typing and doing. With this all someone has to do is go to the same sites you go to and they will have all information they need. Most of these worms can be protected against by getting an anti-virus and keeping it up to date. This is all information people can find online and stuff they should know when using a computer to protect themselves and/or the company they work for. 	When someone is using a company computer it is always possible that someone is trying to sabotage the company. There has been a case when hackers sent email containing a malware called Carbanak to bank employees. They sent this email in hopes that one of the computers using would be used by someone that has administrative passwords. This program would record the keystrokes of the computer this is called keylogging. After getting the username and password it would be possible for them to do anything an administrator for the company to do, this goes from making transaction, to transferring, and deleting records. Using this “unknown group of hackers has reportedly stolen $300 million ¬- possibly as much as triple that amount - from banks across the world”(1).  This all could have been avoided if the employees were properly educated about cyberattacks and what to look out for. 	There was an attack on government systems by a worm called Stuxnet. This was one of the most powerful cyberattacks because it was used by terrorist and it was very dangerous. “The danger is that a similarly sophisticated cyberattack by terrorists, introduced into the banking system through a flash drive carried by an employee working with the terrorists, could do as much economic damage as the 9/11 attacks. An attack that targeted the computers of one or more of the major banks, such as Bank of America, JPMorgan Chase or Citibank, could deny customers access to their accounts and sow confusion and fear, slowing or even halting economic activity”( Investment).  Cyberattacks like this are so powerful that “The pentagon is set to establish as official U.S. policy that it will consider cyberattacks to be “acts of war,” and will respond to them with real-world force”( Oswald). Cyberattacks like this are hard to avoid because if a group of hackers come together to try and destroy a system it’s like a group of thieves coming to rob a house, they’re more likely to succeed with numbers. Cyberattacks like this are making people come to realize that a stronger defense is needed like the hyper-solution. The hyper-solution is when a threat is seen coming it would slow down the system and have the anti-virus speed up and take care of it. Even if this was to actually happen it still wouldn’t be able to stop every attack because there are always ways to overload an anti-virus and make it not work.	 Since it isn’t possible to stop all cyberattacks, reducing the number of cyberattacks is the next best thing to do. While people are creating more advance anti-viruses and more people are learning how to protect themselves against cyberattacks. The number of cyberattacks will decrease and the number of people who have their system crashed or information stolen will also decrease. At the same time, this means people will buy anti-viruses which means the search for anti-viruses will increase since people are buying them. For the people in the computer science field this will open jobs in anti-viruses and if it becomes too big a problem having this knowledge can be beneficial to have when looking for a job. If all of this happens, the companies that get their system broken into will decrease and the claims for acts of war will only happen on large scale cyberattacks. This all starts with the knowledge of protecting yourself from cyberattacks on the individual level. ADHD, the Exponentially Growing Problem	ADHD is a growing problem. To make things worse, there have been and are still studies correlating ADHD to obesity in those who were diagnosed at a young age. Dr. Hibbs and her team have found through extensive study that most of their sample groups have been eating more to cope with their emotions through the process of being cured for ADHD. This is a problem because the number of children with ADHD is already massive, and the damage from being obese is also very high. From there obesity leads to other problems such as depression and diabetes, and more than likely there is no full proof solution. ADHD is leading to obesity and it needs to be stopped.	According to the CDC, as of 2011, 11% of our population’s children from ages four through seventeen have been diagnosed with ADHD, that is approximately 6.4 million children in the United States alone. Then Dr. Samuele Cortese and his team found that of a sample group of 87 participants in an experiment correlating obesity and ADHD, the obesity rate was 41.7%.If we apply Samuele’s study to the number of children found by the CDC to have ADHD, that’s about 27 million children who can have ADHD and be obese simultaneously. Because this number is so high, it can lead to high numbers of other diseases coming based from obesity.	Obesity leads to other diseases such as diabetes. The CDC states that 9.3% of obese children have Type-2 Diabetes. This is fatal because the ADHD medications work by lowering the amount of neurotransmitters released by the brain, such as dopamine or norepinephrine, which prevents the pancreas from keeping insulin levels in check. Therefore a patient in need of both insulin and ADHD medications can’t take both medications at the same time because of the possibility of an insulin spike (Sanchez and etc.) , which can cause insulin shock and then comatose, brain damage, or even death (Wauchope). The solution to this isn’t an easy one, and the slightest miscalculations can lead to mortal problems. The doctors in charge of diagnosing the doses of insulin have to determine the correct time the patients must intake insulin corollary to when they take their ADHD medications and dietary habits to stabilize the insulin in the blood stream. Also, the patient has to be very responsible on taking their medications, otherwise they can end up in insulin shock as well.	Obesity also has a large effect on depression, with rising demands of social norms and public media, children who are prone to the brainwashing coming from what they see on the internet or television lose self confidence based on their looks alone, and this can lead to depression (Harvard Health Publications). Depression is a problem that is still very hard to deal with, and again, because ADHD medications lower the releases of neurotransmitters, depression plays an even bigger role and all in all will have a larger effect, as the body cannot defend itself anymore because of the effects of the medication. Due to the possible side effects, the patients are left with little to no options of finding help. Some patients will have to either be excruciatingly diligent with their medication regiments, otherwise they will have to make the hard decision of choosing which medications to take, and determining which of the medications required is the highest priority.	Another problem factoring the fight against ADHD and obesity hand in hand is cost. The cost of all of ADHD medical insurance alone alone costs anywhere between 12 thousand and 17 thousand dollars a year. So for the range of ages 4 through 17, where ADHD medicines are generally prescribed, the total cost can easily go up to 200 thousand dollars (CDC). Without insurance helping cover some, if not most of these costs, that’s most of an average American’s pay check ($60,000 before taxes). Adding to this, the costs of insulin and anti-depressants themselves cost about 12 thousand dollars a year each, again not accounting insurance (Diabetes Journals). Having the money to pay for these materials, plus the expensive diets, is a luxury. The high costs makes it virtually impossible for low income families to be able to afford treatment. Also, since most of the patients diagnosed with ADHD come from low income families, a large number of children are not getting what they need.	ADHD and its links to obesity is both a large medical and economical problem. This means that a lot of people are making huge sacrifices to fix something they can’t control, or that they aren’t fixing the problem because they can’t afford to control it, and the problem is just going to continue to grow at exponential rates. Right now, the only solutions that are prescribed are to treat it with extensive care, which is unrealistic because it’s simply too hard to do for most families and doctors alike. Other solutions however, are still being studied. Michel Odent says that we should look at  the links of ADHD and obesity as one whole disease, like bulimia nervosa, not two separate ones. By thinking of it as a single disease, it becomes easier to prioritize symptoms. Dr. Christoph Lauer and his team also found that addressing the problem as bulimia nervosa, he found that it’s easier to start solving the problem. It’s easier to solve this problem because bulimia nervosa is and has been around for a long time and already is receiving attention.	Because of Lauer’s and Odent’s research, my solution is to first handle the bulimia nervosa, without drugs, which can help deal with the obesity problem. From there, we can continue to prescribe ADHD medications and deal with that problem. This should be easy because there are already ways to deal with bulimia nervosa without drugs by using other feeding methods that help recreate healthy eating schedules (Klein). Klein’s team found that they could use aspartame, an artificial sweetener, to enhance the appetites of people with and without bulimia nervosa alike. This helps patients by making them want to eat, disrupting the regimen the put themselves in with bulimia nervosa. By normalizing their eating habits, they are less susceptible to requiring insulin, so they won’t need to worry about taking their ADHD medications with it.	ADHD and obesity when diagnosed with both, are a huge problem. Although there are a handful of solutions, they are very conditional, and most of them can only help prevent further issues from arising. Aside from being hard solutions, these solutions also come with heavy costs and the larger majority of those who need treatment, cannot receive it. The only rational way to solve this problem is to catch it before it becomes deadly. The American Doctors’ Drug Problem	People give the utmost trust to physicians as their patients by seeking necessary treatments, whether advice or medication, to overcome various ailments. However, it is becoming more and more common for a patient to receive a prescription drug for their treatment. In 2011, a record number of 4.02 billion drug prescriptions were written, which is an increase from the 3.99 billion the previous year (Koba). The rampant increase of drug sales propelled many to be skeptical towards the influencing factors underlying the medical society. With a ruthless desire for truth, investigators looked into every possible hypothesis leaving no one safe from their scrutiny. Consequently, the investigations illuminated to the public the true doctor-pharmaceutical relationship by exposing the influence well-known pharmaceutical companies have on doctors’ prescription decisions. 	The origin of pharmaceutical companies is not one familiar to many, but its daunting past is the predecessor of today’s companies. Before the revolutionary war, merchants peddled drugs across America acting as a distributor. As merchants began to make money, they formed groups to increase sales (Feldman). This in sense was the framework for future pharmaceutical companies. The profitable groups began to demand that a certain quality must be met for drugs sold in America, effectively opening the door for the commercialization of pharmaceuticals. Pharmaceutical companies began to pop up around the country and in 1866, a prominent company by the name of Johnson & Johnson opened up in New Jersey (Feldman). Theses companies were established by men in hopes of making money through sales. Being a business, pharmaceutical companies began to employ sales tactics, which today are representatives. These companies make money, as any business does, by having their manufactured products be in demand. However, their products are largely in prescription sales, making physicians their target demographic. Pharmaceutical representatives travel to doctors to proselytize them to sell their products, which appears to be perverting the doctors’ practices – especially prescription writing. Because of this, three hypotheses have been formed in regards to why doctors prescribe certain medications, these are: the doctor is informed and believes the drug of choice to be the best for the patient; the doctor is uniformed and, by negligence, prescribes the drug of choice based on false information; and, finally, the doctors are prescribing drugs due to the rent-seeking tactics of pharmaceutical companies (rent-seeking can be thought of as obtaining sales by offering gifts, food, etc. to obtain a physician’s loyalty) (Engleberg).  	The recent influx of prescriptions - mainly more expensive, brand-named ones- put the spotlight on the doctor-pharmaceutical relationship and the influence it has on the medical community. In his article, Following the Script: How Drug Reps Make Friends and Influence Doctors, Shahram Ahari reflects on his time as a “Drug Rep” saying, “It’s my job to find out what a physician’s price is. For some it’s dinner at the finest restaurants, for others it’s enough convincing data to let them prescribe confidently, and for others it’s my attention and friendship… but at the most basic level, everything is for sale and everything is an exchange.” (Ahari) This statement clearly exemplifies the intentions of pharmaceutical companies, which can further be seen by how drug representative encounters take place.Representatives are out to win sales, and in male-dominant profession it is not surprising that pharmaceutical companies recruit mainly collegiate and professional cheerleaders. There is saying “you’ll never meet an ugly drug rep” (Saul), which shows how pharmaceutical companies are out to manipulate male physicians. Furthermore, pharmaceutical companies offer an honorarium to physicians for allowing a representative to follow them in order to learn about medical practices and inform the physicians about new pharmaceuticals (Wazana). In other words, physicians receive money from the pharmaceutical company for allowing their representative to be present and to further preach their product. According to Ashely Wazana in her article, Physician and Pharmaceutical Companies: Is a Gift Ever Just a Gift, this practice infringes on the patient’s rights and is not in the best interest for the patient or anyone other than the doctor and pharmacy (Wazana). Allowing representatives to be present during patient examinations could potentially create an influence on the doctor pushing him to prescribe their product. Furthermore, the representative is in no way qualified for any medical situation, therefore rendering his presence useless in a medical point of view (Wazana). 	The pharmaceutical representation influencing doctors is merely an idea that was hard to back up until Joseph Engelberg, Christopher Parsons, and Nathan Theft presented their study on proximity. They hypothesized that the closer the hospital was to the pharmaceutical company’s headquarters, the more likely the physicians were to prescribe their drugs (Engleberg). This hypothesis is based on the thought that hospitals closer to pharmaceutical headquarters were more likely to be targeted by the firm and visited more frequently. In fact, the results correlated with the prediction and showed an increase of sales for a firm’s drug as the hospitals got closer to the headquarters (Engleberg). These results exemplified the influence of pharmaceutical companies on prescriptions, but did not provide an answer to which of the three earlier hypotheses were correct.	Using this now known knowledge, the trio set out to explain thought process doctors used when prescribing drugs. Using the same group of doctors – about a 334,000 sample size, or in other words, half of the practicing physicians in America- they went a step further and checked into how much money each doctor received from the pharmaceutical companies using the Dollar for Docs website (Engleberg). This allowed the physicians to be numerically ordered based on monetary acceptances. Next, using the dataset of prescription reimbursements by Medicare, they were able to determine which doctors prescribed the most brand-name drugs and create another list based on that (Engleberg). An easy comparison of the two lists showed a positive correlation between the amounts of money accepted versus the amount of brand-name prescriptions written. This research further credited the hypothesis that it is rent-seeking tactics as the underlying force for prescriptions. 	Not surprisingly, a group of doctors argued against the trio’s points saying the data was inconclusive. They did not want their names to be slandered and claimed that they prescribed those drugs because it was what the patients needed and what they believed to be the best option - reverting back to the first hypothesis that the doctor-pharmaceutical company relationship does not influence them, but their decisions are made purely on information. They also argued that some illnesses can only be cured with an expensive, brand-name drug and that those prescriptions inflated the number of brand-name drugs prescribed (Engleberg). This self-glorifying argument presented the companies and doctors as victims of the trio and created an image of innocence and nobility for themselves.	Quick to refute, the trio conducted looking at the prescribing of Astrazeneca’s and Pfizer’s (both pharmaceutical giants) cholesterol-reducing blockbusters named Crestor and Lipitor, respectively. These products are considered to be equal on every level and are prescribed to many people across the country (Engleberg). These drugs were chosen in order to rebut the claim that doctors used their best judgement in prescribing and believed a certain drug to be superior based on data, because they are known to be twins (drugs that have the same effectiveness). It also nullified the claim that the number was inflated, because these drugs are interchangeable with their generic counterparts that also have the same effectiveness. Following a similar procedure as before, two lists were created: one based on money received and the other based on the drug prescribed. Again, there was a correlation showing physicians that received money from Astrazeneca prescribed Crestor more often and those that received money from Pfizer prescribe Lipitor more often (Engleberg). These numbers cannot be argued, for the research eliminated any possibility for discrepancies.	As if this crippling evidence showing the doctor-pharmaceutical company relationship as intrinsically selfish wasn’t enough, another study was conducted to further investigate this so called relationship. This time a brand-name drug prescribing rate was compared to a well-known generic version with the same success rate and a lower price. The results came back and the expected was revealed. Physicians who received honorariums from pharmaceutical companies prescribed the expensive brand-name drug more frequently (Engleberg). Using a well-known brand-name drug and well-known generic drug made it even more difficult to attribute this correlation to a physician being informed or naïve about the drugs. 	The controversy that doctors are potentially subjected to a conflict of interests is not new one (Engleberg). These studies conducted gave empirical evidence showing corruption in the medical industry. This controversy, once only backed by opinion polls, now has concrete evidence on the doctor-pharmaceutical relationship and repeatedly proves the point that not all doctors nor the pharmaceutical companies have the patients’ best interests in mind. There have been attempts at fixing this system both on the government and private level: websites have been created to inform people about which doctors accept honorariums so that one can make a well-informed decision on a physician (Engleberg), there are no more one-on-one meetings allowed for doctors and representatives (Anderson), and the Physician Payment Sunshine Act was past –this required all monetary transactions between pharmaceutical companies and doctors to be public. It is important to have a means of communicating with doctors about new prescription drugs becoming available, but it needs to be a fact based system without any incentives for siding with one company or another. If we fail to take the creed out of medicine, the patients (the general public) will be the ones to suffer the consequences. .  How to Build a Flying Motorcycle The flying features and mobility of a helicopter in a small, compact, personal size of a motorcycle, once science fiction is now possible to build. A vehicle of this sort could be used as a simple, efficient form of transportation or could even be used to rescue people in hard to reach places.  People would no longer be confined to the conventional roads we use today; instead, these machines could take the rider in any direction over any surface. The future is now and we have the technology to bring ideas of science fiction into the factual world around us. Engineers and inventors alike should consider bringing more outlandish ideas to life and showing everyone the new technological possibilities around us today.  Advances are made every day in the world of engineering. Mechanical engineers especially are pushed to come up with inventive ideas and solutions to problems on a regular basis.  The sources used during the research for this paper helped guide me to a solution to creating a flying motorcycle. My sources show the fall and success of different designs and all of them agree that using vertically lifting propellers would be the most effective. The articles also agree that the quad-copter propeller orientation is the most stable in take off and in flight. Two of my sources I used are mathematical representations of a helicopter, the mathematical models will help me find the physics necessary to hover and turn the hover bike into a six dimensional moving machine (free to use any and combine the six degrees of freedom). The sources agree that the rigidity of the helicopter and the consumption of fuel must be ignored in order to make the models accurate. My third and tenth source capitalized on the fuel consumption issue by combustion engines leading to the use of electric motors, different engine orientations and quantities to make for optimal electricity usage and performance. My sources all say that the math for a small helicopter to carry the weight of a human will stand, but the performance will be greatly compromised. The fifth and sixth articles I have chosen, explore what others have done in the field and I will be using them to rule out ideas and form new ones that could lead to the success of the hover bike. One article I found by Rafi Yoeli, has listed three reasons why the hover car isn't a mainstream mode of travel yet and is agreed with by Kohler Nicholas in an article about the insurance and ethics about a flying car. The main reason they aren't around today is there is no need to have a flying car if it cant keep up or out perform a regular car. The lack of need has put all projects for a flying car out of the main focus because even if they were successful in creating one, the market isn't there to buy it so no money would be made off of the project. Unfortunately the market not existing makes sense, so a flying car, even if we currently have the technology, won't be finished for a while longer. I am impatient and I personally would like to have a personal hover bike, so a need for the technology must be discovered. We can first look at racing and maybe create a new event or we could look at urban rescue, in places a helicopter couldn’t fit. The first idea for a flying car came about in 1917 by the inventor, Glenn Curtis. The “Autoplane” never actually flew but manages some short hops with its 40-foot wingspan and the actual car’s motor. More flying cars were designed, built and tested, and some were extremely successful, but all struggles to quickly adapt to a road from the air. Just about every design up until the “Skycar” used wings and a propeller to make the vehicle airborne. According to Kevin Bonsor, the “Skycar,” built by Paul Moller, uses eight rotary engines and a total of 720 horsepower to lift the behemoth off the ground and carry the machine up to four hundred miles per hour and still manage to get twenty miles to the gallon. The Skycar is currently the most advanced flying car prototype exposed to the public. The vehicle shows promise as being a viable way of travel in the near future. The reason these vehicles haven’t been mass-produced yet is mainly due to expense. The first few Skycars are estimated to cost around one million dollars each. For a million dollars a person could simply joyride because laws and other ordinances are not in place to let a person travel freely. The flying machines have always been designed to fly and to take more than one-person far distances quickly. I don’t believe that the flying part is necessary; hovering could be just as effective, either way the vehicle would be travelling as the crow flies. There are four main places to focus on in order to make this personal hovercraft, a power source, a way of propulsion, a body, and a computer to control it all.  The four foci of the vehicle should be created with technology we have access to today to firstly keep the cost down and secondly to make this a possibility today. With the cost down, more people could buy this invention and make it mainstream. The vehicle could be powered by gas, or electricity. A combustion engine powering the machine offers a few advantages, but also many disadvantages. The danger of a combustion engine is firstly the danger in the event of a crash. If one crashed on the machine it could possibly explode which could injure or kill a rider even at very low speeds. One advantage is the large power output attainable by these engines. The key to flying would be having an extremely light weight power source which makes the two stroke internal combustion engine the perfect fit. The mathematical model by Blair, Hinds, and Fleck, suggest that a simple, small two-stroke engine around 125 cubic centimeters could output over 30 horsepower. A combustion engine sounds like a perfect fit for this project but the largest issue that arises is fuel consumption and weight differential created by the different amount of fuel in the tank of the machine the less fuel in the tank the lighter the vehicle will be and the sloshing around of liquid could create enough imbalanced that the riding it would be impossible.  The only answer for power source now seems to be electricity. On most quad copters today, each propeller is powered by a separate motor and linked through a computer that controls the spin rate of each propeller. Versus gasoline, electricity is much cheaper and more available so charging the machine would be easy. For instance, a rider could charge the vehicle while at work all day and come back to a charged mode of transportation ready to take him or her home. The batteries used to supply the power would be the new aluminum ion batteries that are more efficient and more durable and faster charging than lithium ion batteries (Meng-Chang). Taking inspiration from the quad copters of today, a four-propeller design seems to be ideal. The stability, athleticism and power of the design described by Pound, Mahoney, and Corki, is irresistible to use in the flying motorcycle design.  The rider would sit directly in the middle and have their weight distributed evenly across all four points of power. The propeller needs to have a special design in order to maximize the efficiency in the least amount of space possible, so a duct could surround each propeller to make them more powerful. In some cases a duct can make the propeller up to 94% more efficient according to Jon Longbottom. The propeller itself would undergo a change and mimic the fin of a whale to make the most out of the surface area. The largest outdoor musical amphitheater use giant fans to cool off its crowd of 12, 500. Recently the blades underwent a change because the seats were almost unbearable at times, and the fans made too much noise. The blades now mimic whale flippers and are silent along with push a larger volume of air down to cool the crowd. To finish off the super propellers, a CRP (Contra-rotating propellers) design commonly used on boats and horizontally on airplanes, will be converted to use vertically in the air to add to the lifting capabilities of the personal flying machine.  Lanchester says CRP propeller designs have the potential to add up to 16% more efficiency over a regular prop design. Because both air and water are both liquids, the physics and theories behind the CRP shouldn’t change, therefore making this an easy transition. The body of the vehicle needs to be sturdy but light weight and must stand up to a crash in case one happens. Fiberglass seems to be a good option because it is lightweight but it does flex and bend more than a metal so the strong upward force created by the propellers could bend and warp the body. Carbon fiber is even lighter and stiffer than fiberglass and steel. Although it is conductive and could potentially short the motors in the case of a crash, a thin paint or liner could fix this problem. Carbon fiber is corrosion resistant and would survive a crash if a battery leaked onto the body without damage.  The brains behind the personal hovercraft would ideally be an iPad or some other type of powerful computing tablet with a precise gyroscope, which would have an application that displays speed, temperature of the motors, rotations per minute of each propeller, flight time left, and uses the internal gyroscope to keep the machine aloft and perfectly balanced at all times. The tablet would make the user interface friendly and keep this technology on the cutting edge.  New tablets allow a user to input their fingerprint into the device, having the fingerprint of the rider be the key to the vehicle would be an interesting way to access it. People would no longer have to carry around a key or worry about losing it when they have a key with them 100% of the time. Estimating the total cost is proving to be extremely difficult with variables such as testing and labor. The prices for the main components can be estimated but it would not show an accurate cost to build. The raw material carbon fiber costs anywhere from nine to thirty dollars a square foot and without an accurate vehicle dimension, the calculated price is impossible to figure out. The tablet user interface would probably be around one thousand dollars including the attachment to the vehicle.  The propellers and motors may have to be custom made so pricing again is impossible. To make this project survive, the average person would need to be able to afford it so the price must not be astronomical. I would estimate the cost of this project to be around the same as an average car after the project has been finalized. In other words the goal would be to have the machine cost down to around $25,000.00.Could this flying machine be built today? Yes. All of the ideas and concepts described exist and could be assembled for somewhere close to an affordable amount. Why would a machine such as this even be created? The future is now, we have the Technology to build these amazing machines and we should start advancing technology even as refined as transportation. If some 18-year-old student can design an affordable hovercraft it will show younger and younger kids that ideas can become realities and should be built to continue to raise the bar. This hovercraft unfortunately only fulfills certain niches and roles. The machine can't take you hundreds of miles on a full charge, but it can make the few mile journeys even faster. In the military these could be ideal because they would not touch the ground, therefore they wouldn’t set off road bombs. They could also be used to traverse any terrain, if a pile of boulders fell onto a person now you would most likely have to drive over the rocks in order to save the person, now no extra force will be added to the rocks when trying to reach them.  Same-species populations geographically separated by a mass of water in different locals are appearing to carry different morphological traits.  In the South Indonesian country of Papua New Guinea, a number of the surrounding islands in the archipelago, and the most northern tip of Australia, are home to populations of Green Tree Pythons (Morelia Viridis).  Because of the geographical separation, these populations are breeding among themselves, changing their morphology slowly over time because of a large number of factors.  The question of which factors are playing a large role in causing these to occur is currently up for debate.  Some of the factors that the community has been focusing on as the main reasons for this variation in morphological traits in any population is the variation in season and climate (Tracy, 1999; Ashton, 2001; Zuffi et al., 2009), along with the availability and size of the prey (Forsman, 1991; Pearson et al., 2002; Krause et al., 2003).  These arguments for the cause of these changes are viable, yet the environmental difference that could play a large role in these morphological variations could be largely controlled by the altitude at which the population lives at. The mountainous regions that some populations of Morelia Viridis come from are high in elevation.  Altitude can cause tremendous changes to the environment, “Elevation has strong effects on climate and biota. In Hawaii, elevation on volcanic mountains affects temperature, rainfall, vegetation, and fauna. The effect of elevation on animal distribution and abundance can be direct through effects on climate or, in the case of phytophagous insects, indirectly mediated through climatic effects on host plants” (Goldsmith 2007).   This is a prime example of altitude playing a part in the shaping of the ecosystem. The temperature and humidity, amount of rainfall high in the New Guinean Rainforests affects which plants can grow, which affects what insects can flourish to be no sooner eaten by the small mammal, bird, or reptile species, which is finally captured in the mouth of a hungry Green Tree Python. This Morelia V. however, is eating larger prey items containing differing nutrients than the snake on the smaller island off the coast, in the hotter, drier weather. “Because snakes are gape-limited predators, their diet is constrained by their gape size and, thus, geographic variations in body and head sizes are linked strongly to the size and shape of available prey” (Arnold, 1993; Vincent et al., 2004). “Higher elevation areas in general are cooler and wetter than lower elevations, and have more pronounced seasonality.” (Goldsmith 2007)  This would most likely cause the population in the area with the larger prey items to be larger in size, to accommodate its prey.  This situation can be applied to the large number of variables that occur through a difference in altitude.  In terms of coloration; differences in the environment like vegetation, over time and multiple generation’s worth of breeding in the same local and gene pool, would start to show signs of changing the fauna’s coloration to blend in to its environment.  The trees that the Green Tree Python is cruising along on the northern tip of Australia, could be an entire different shade of green or brown than on the Main Island of Papua New Guinea.  In regards to other work speaking about geographically separated populations, Goldsmith shows another prime example of coloration variations based upon environment, “Some island populations exhibit a top level of variability with clear morphological differentiation. A typical example is the lizard population from Licosa Island, with all individuals showing intense hyperchromatic coloration in the ventral region. The coloration is displayed in various shades of blue, which has led some authors to define the island population as a subspecies” (Fulgione, Guglielmi, Odierna, Rippa, Caliendo, Rastogi; 2008) so in some cases, the differences in morphological structure are becoming so pronounced that the community is claiming them as subspecies.  Some counter arguments may involve the bringing up of the small difference in elevation change in some geographically separated populations, and that this would mean my hypothesis would not be true.  I would respond to that by saying that there may be some populations that live at the same altitude, even a large majority, but that doesn’t conflict with my statement.  Because all of those populations could very well be very similar, with little to no changes in morphology, yet the populations that are in largely different altitudes may be morphologically variable.  This in fact would prove my point to a further extent.  Some short comings that I have come across in my research is the lack of data I have been able to find on the locations, and more specifically the elevation of the animals being captured and studied.  This would allow me to better draw my conclusions on this hypothesis. Although the fact that this data is not as prevalent as I hoped may be the reason the idea hasn’t been discussed more thoroughly.  With this data I could compare populations from different altitudes and find correlations in morphology that could be explained by the environmental effects of the elevation variation.  Another issue I found was that some of the data I have reviewed was slightly skewed.  Not at the fault of the scientists involved, “…individuals from the Aru islands may have lost condition because of the long period needed to transport snakes from their point of capture to the collector located in the main port on the far side of the Aru archipelago…” (Natusch, Lyons; 2014).  With this in mind, it also showed that they did not have the data on the location/altitude of its capture.  If the difference in elevation of the separated populations of Morelia V.  is correlated to morphological variation in different ways depending on said elevation, this could most likely be applied to an extremely large area of research on other morphological changes being seen in populations of animals all over the world, creating a better understanding of the world we live in and help us see the big picture.I am not trying to disprove other arguments by stating that elevation could be the cause behind the morphological differences, I am trying to bring together all of the variables in the discussion by finding the beginning of the line in the cause of this variation.  Altitude could be the cause of the difference in the prey size/type that each population consumes.  It affects the temperature and humidity directly, forcing the environment to adapt to these conditions. In a way I am shedding light on the main factor that controls the environment.	As the biological community discusses the multitude of reasons behind morphological variation in same-species populations that are geographically separated, I concur that availability of prey type/size, climate and seasonality, and surrounding environment have effects on their variation in morphology.  But I am bringing to the table the idea of elevation, and its effect on all of the above factors, showing that elevation could be the leading reason in trending morphology in these populations.  In high elevation cloud rainforests, humidity is high and temperature is lower, allowing a different environment to develop from the ground up, which includes what kind of prey is available.  Elevation also controls the type of plants that flourish, which could be quite variable depending on if you’re at sea-level or in the cloud rainforests of Papua New Guinea.  These differences in plants could be based on color or texture, and over time allow the animals to adapt to their environment, which could include changing its coloration among other things.  I believe that this could be a driving factor in the morphological variation between separated populations such as Morelia Viridis.  Meaning that all reasons for the variation would have roots coming from the elevation of its environment.  This research could mean many things for the scientific community, including it being able to be applied to many cases around the world with different types of animals.  It is important for the furthering of our understanding of the world that we all live in. There have been many studies showing and asking the legitimacy of vaccinations for children. Some say that there is no reason to get your child vaccinated because they believe it is just a pharmaceutical ploy, religious/faith beliefs, and that some vaccines cause illnesses. I believe that as a result of not getting any vaccinations, you are more likely to get a disease like the Chicken Pox as an adult. In conclusion, people should get vaccinated early to avoid such dangerous circumstances. The basics around immunity and vaccinations are quite simple and can be found on www.medicinenet.com. How immunity works is that your body is invaded by germs in order to make you sick such as chicken pox and then after being sick and after your antibodies have cured you, your antibodies now recognize the strain that you are sick from. Then in the future, the antibodies will be able to kill the germs before it makes you sick. When receiving a vaccination, you will be injected with dead germs (e.g. measles) then the antibodies will recognize it before the real one makes you sick. Vaccinations are safe, for the most part, unless there is a reaction. From the article, it says that it is more dangerous to get the disease than it is to get the vaccination. Other positive aspects of vaccinations are that vaccines don’t have to be expensive (children get free shots at public clinics and private doctors you may need to pay a small fee), no age limit on vaccines (no matter how late you are), and shots usually work (90%-99% of the time). With all of these positive outcomes and possibilities, I believe that vaccinations are the best way to go and are completely legitimate to the purpose they pose. There are many reasons to get vaccinated such that when you refuse vaccinations, you have a high risk of your body catching a threatening disease. In the article from the NIFD (National Foundation for Infectious Diseases), they bring up some very interesting reasons to get vaccinated, and not only to your benefit, but for the people around you. One reason is that vaccine-preventable diseases are expensive such that on average in our society it costs “$10 billion a year for direct costs and indirect costs” (an indirect cost could be missing school/work). Another reason to get vaccinated is that when you get sick, the people around you (especially the younger population because they are more susceptible to illness) are at risk of contracting the disease that could’ve been easily preventable with a shot. Lastly, the vaccines won’t give you the disease that they are trying to prevent. “Some vaccines contain ‘killed’ virus, and it is impossible to get the disease from them. Others have live, but weakened, viruses designed to ensure that you cannot catch the disease.” In the article by the Healthy Home Economist, people believe that we can’t trust pharmaceutical companies because a drug called HRT (hormone replacement therapy) had results find that the drug gives women a twice as likely possibility of developing breast cancer, another drug that was taken off of the market was Vioxx, which caused many deaths due to heart attacks and strokes. Another reason people don’t trust vaccinations to give to their children is that some vaccinations have had problems and been taken off of the market because of the dangers that posed such that “folks who received the vaccine reported symptoms worse than the disease itself.” Those are some of the reasons not to give your child or even anybody vaccinations. Although, there are some risks of getting vaccinated, the good outweighs the bad in the response of getting vaccinated. I believe that everyone including children should get vaccinations in order to prevent any dangerous diseases later in life. In the article Implementing School-Located Influenza Vaccination of Children, it explained why “the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends influenza vaccinations for all children 6 months to 18 years of age.” They researched about school-located vaccinations and found out that there are many strategies to influence vaccinations in schools in order to increase vaccinations in schools. They found that there is no issue in cost of vaccinations at schools because it’s much more inexpensive than outside of the school and as well saves the child’s parents money since they don’t have to miss work in order to vaccinate their child. Also, whenever the children are about to be given the vaccine, the nurses or medical official will always give a consent form to the parents to ensure that they understand everything that they will do to their child and their information they need to make an informed decision whether they want their child vaccinated. In conclusion to this article, they have found out that school-located vaccinations are “feasible and effective.” The only down side to this is that this would decrease contact between the pediatrician and the child. In both articles about the relationship of immunization (MMR vaccine) and autism (ASD), there have been studies on whether there is a cause for autism and one of those being the MMR vaccine (Measles-mumps-rubella vaccine). There is no definite cause for a child to become autistic and no way to prevent it either. This article had brought to light a possible association between the MMR vaccine, IBD (Inflammatory Bowel Disease), and ASD (Autistic Spectrum Disorder). In order to figure out the association between the vaccine and the disorder, a conference was held to discuss finding against and for the association by bringing together parents, practitioners, and scientists/researchers. The conclusion that they came to was that the “MMR vaccine has received much public and political attention and there are many who have derived their own conclusions based on personal experiences, the available evidence does not support the hypothesis that MMR vaccine causes autism or associated disorders or IBD.” Researchers need to stay on track in trying to determine the actual causes of autistic spectrum disorder. In the article about childhood immunization controversies, it explains the common speculations of getting a variety of different vaccines. One of the many sub articles in the paper was called “Why Should I Have My Teenager Immunized Against Hepatitis B? She Certainly Will Not Be Using Intravenous Drugs or Having Premarital Sex or Anything Like That!” This article explained that 10% of adults are at risk for chronic hepatitis B and babies have an even greater risk because they will acquire the virus from the mother, most likely when the babies are being breast fed by the mothers. The second part of the sub article explained the reasons for teenagers needing immunization for Hep B. Most parents say that they don’t need it because they don’t participate in “high risk behaviors,” but the truth is that going to school and playing sports are high risk behaviors, like if a person started bleeding on you, you run the risk of contracting Hep B. In an another sub article in the paper called “My Child Got the Pneumococcal Vaccine but is Still Getting Ear Infections” and explains the overuse of antibiotics on children due to the intensified resistance of the virus and that when a new type of vaccine that included “7 serotypes representing the most common virulent strains seen in childhood. Since that time, the incidence of invasive disease has decreased by 80% for those less than 2 years of age, including a 90% decrease in vaccine-related serotypes.” This paper includes many types of scenarios for many types of vaccines. In conclusion to this paper, “it is critical that physicians remain up to date on vaccine efficacy and safety and serve as advocates for timely administration.” Even if there are controversies found everywhere about immunizations, most of them can be disproven due to the fact that little science is involved. In the article about anaphylaxis after vaccinations, explained the risk of anaphylaxis and the unlikelihood of death. In the early years of life, children discover what they are allergic to; in combination to their not fully developed immune system can have the possibility of an allergic reaction to the many vaccines administered. Even with this risk of an allergic reaction, children still should be vaccinated, because even if there is a reaction, doctors are trained to deal with it. Anaphylaxis due to a vaccine has a very low risk of occurring. The method used in Belgium was that they first drafted a guideline for this procedure and then a consultations was met to discuss the safety precautions. In result, they published the incidence rates of anaphylaxis after vaccinations. I believe even if there is a chance of anaphylaxis due to vaccinations, doctors are available if it were to occur, so it is worth getting the shot. In conclusion, many people have their opinions about vaccinations: some don’t believe in vaccinations due to religion/faith and some don’t think vaccines work. I believe that when caring for the well-being of your child, you should do everything to protect them from these diseases by getting the vaccination. Results from your child getting vaccinated can lead to dire consequences as an adult, like the chicken pox. The world’s health system (or at least in the United States) have made it their goal to make sure parents are fully informed about all the vaccines that are going to be administered to their child. I understand that there are many studies online and in articles that tells the public that vaccines are dangerous to you and your child, but from these articles you can see that not taking them gives you an even greater risk than not taking them. An example article that can scare parents is an article that discusses the relationship between the MMR vaccine and autism and how the vaccine promotes that disorder in children. However, no scientific evidence has been able to prove that this public statement is true. Tell yourself or tell your child which is more important: the well-being of your child or your conscious?  The Rage Against Roids	Steroids have been a controversial issue throughout the world of sports. The use of enhancement drugs dates all the way back to 776 BC during the original Olympics in Ancient Greece. Roman Gladiators used enhancement drugs to prevent fatigue and injury and called it “doping,” which originated from the Dutch word “doop,” (Washington Post).  Doop was a viscous opium juice, which was the drug of choice of the Ancient Greeks that made them enhance their performance. Also, In 100 AD Roman gladiators fed their horses a substance called hydromel, which was an alcoholic beverage made from honey, to make them run faster. The word “doping” is still used today and it means to consume drugs. Steroids, also called Roids or Juice, are taken in liquid or pill form and are only traced through urine tests (Sportstales).	They are even more popular today as athletes are getting bigger and more competitive at a younger age. Many famous athletes, like Lance Armstrong and Alex Rodríguez, have recently been caught and punished for taking steroids, saying it gave them an unfair advantage and jeopardized the integrity of the sport. Armstrong was stripped of his seven titles and Rodriguez was suspended from 162 games with a forfeited salary. Both of their legacies and reputations were ruined because of the negative reputation steroids have.  Most people think performance enhancement drugs should always be illegal; however, they fail to realize all of the benefits that would come if steroids were legal in sports. I believe that steroids should be legal because they have health benefits, bring fairness back to sports, improve entertainment and increase the length of the player’s career.	Legalizing steroids would bring health and physical benefits to athletes. According to the Marquette University Law Journal, with the proper medical supervision, steroid use can be healthy for athletes (MULJ). Steroids reduce inflammation, pain and swelling of injuries, which could help the athletes remain healthy through the long, draining season. They also increase muscle mass and strength, which would help prevent injuries. Steroids can also improve mental cognition and focus that can help athletes concentrate during workouts and games. Lastly, performance-enhancing steroids have Erythropoietin, which increases the red blood cells' capacity for carrying oxygen. Although steroids can be very dangerous, if they are used the correct way there will be less chances of negative side effects and overdose. The Marquette University Law Journal said that side effects can only be increased on three instances: if the steroids are used more than the recommended dose, if they are used in conjunction with other performance enhancing substances, or if counterfeit or tainted steroids are used. If the athletes were monitored correctly while using the steroids, there will be less health risks. The team physicians should monitor the athlete’s consumption of the drugs by keeping the drugs in their possession and controlling the amount of dosage they take. They should also keep close watch of how the athletes react to certain drugs and make sure there are no negative physical or mental affects.	If this enhancement drug is not used properly then it can cause fatal damage to a person’s body. The effects of steroids to a man may differ from the effects of a woman. For both sexes this drug may effect their reproductive system, hepatic/liver, Cardiovascular, cerebrovascular and hematological effects, Musculoskeletal, endocrine, renal, and psychological effects (Science Direct). Women that are pregnant can potentially harm their child. Inappropriate use of steroids can also cause acne, breast development, hair growth in abnormal places and increased aggressiveness, called “roid rage.” The Medical Journal of Australia linked high doses of steroid use for several weeks to uncontrollable bursts of aggression (MJA). However, this can all be prevented if the steroids are used correctly. However, legalizing steroids can also bring fairness to sports. In the Journal of Medical Ethics, Schermer said “It is unfair if some competitors can use an effective performance enhancer, while others cannot. But this is no reason to ban the technology all together, because this unfairness can be solved relatively easily by allowing the technology and by ensuring equal access for all.” (JME). Steroid abuse in sports has been happening since the beginning of time and no matter how many times people get caught, athletes are still using them. Even though the testing process for enhancement drugs is very strict and getting more intense by the day, the use of steroids is unpreventable. There will always be athletes that are secretly using drugs, which means the playing field will always be unfair. Therefore, if steroids are legal every athlete has the choice to use them and the competition will be fair.  	Another thing that people don’t realize that legalizing steroids would bring is a higher level of play. If all athletes are stronger and faster, the game will be more entertaining and attract more fans.  With players performing at a higher, more intense level, it will attract more fans and bring more revenue for the leagues. Imagine if LeBron James took steroids how more explosive and exciting it would be to watch him. In the article, “Steroids Should Be Legal In Sports,” Callen James argues that America doesn’t like watching boring sports. “The fans want to see larger than life players hitting homeruns each time they are at bat. The action of an explosive offense is what keeps the people entertained. In America, bigger is better!”	Legalizing steroids can also increase the length of the player’s careers. If their muscles are stronger, their bodies can take more pounding and not get injured as easy. For example, Bulls point guard, Derrick Rose has been suffering reoccurring knee injuries for the past three years. The NBA physicians have said that Rose’s body is weak which makes him more prone to injuries.  If Derrick Rose was able to take steroids, he would be able to repair his body and get his strength back in his legs. He would also be able to play much longer. The average age that a NBA player retires is age 36, but with the legalization of steroids they could play into their mid-40s (Forbes). Last October, NBA players LeBron James and Dirk Nowitizi said that the NBA should shorten the length of the regular season because the long 82-game season is too hard on their bodies. "Once you go out and play on the floor, it don't matter if you play 22 minutes -- like I may be playing tonight -- or you're playing 40 minutes," LeBron James said. "Once you play, it takes a toll on your body. So it's not lessening the minutes, I think it's the games." He also thinks that playing consecutive games between flights causes fatigue which hurts the team in the next game (ESPN). Playing 82 games a season, a player might be forced to sit out about 20 games to give their body rest for the playoffs. However, if NBA players were able to take steroids, their bodies could endure the long season and remain healthy. Lastly, steroids should be legal because the testing system is flawed. Many sports leagues test for steroids at random times to catch the athletes off guard. Steroids can be detected by urine, hair follicles or blood samples.  If an athlete is caught with steroids in their system they can be kicked out of the league, their awards can be taken away, they can be asked to pay a fine, and they may even have to serve time in jail (BMJ). The current steroid testing system is not very good because they are only performed during the season so during the off-season players could be taking drugs and not get caught. Also, some players are so sneaky that they find drugs that are not on the banned list yet so they cannot be punished if it is caught in their system. There are also many ways to cheat on a steroid test. In the book, “Dunks, Doubles, Doping: How Steroids Are Killing American Athletics” Fitness writer Nathan Jendrick says, “a classic method of evading positive drug tests is to couple the use of natural herb diuretics such as dandelion root, uva ursi, and caffeine with fasting." He also said many athletes use the “urine replacement” technique which, “involves exchanging an athlete’s urine, which he knows is dirty, and replacing it with clean urine (Jendrick, 183). Because the testing system is so flawed and there is no way of preventing athletes from using, they should legalize steroids or create a better testing system that can’t be cheated. People that are against legalizing steroids say that they are unhealthy, unfair to athletes that aren’t using, they have negative side effects, and they hurt the integrity of the sport. In the British Medical Journal titled “Drugs in Sports” the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) said that “doping jeopardizes the moral and ethical basis of sport and the health of those involved in it.”  They argue that if players are taking steroids the sport becomes fake and it would away the respect and integrity from the sport.  The NFL steroid policy says that if steroids were legal it would “send the wrong message to young people who may be tempted to use them.” However, I believe that if steroids were legal and used the right way the sports industry would improve all around. Athletes will be stronger and be able to compete longer. It would also be more interesting to watch the biggest athletes compete at the highest level. If steroids use was monitored, there will be more benefits than negatives. Table Tennis Ethnographic EssayIntroduction: For my ethnographic essay, I chose to do a study on the Table Tennis Club located in the student recreation center at the University of Kansas. The purpose of this essay is to study the impacts of this club on the students at KU and to discuss whether or not such impacts were what students wanted from joining the club. I developed an interest in this club when I first began playing table tennis in the lobby of my dormitory. I was enjoying a game when a tournament table tennis player walked up to me and told me to join Table Tennis Club. Due to my interest in table tennis, I decided this would be the club for me. When I joined, it allowed me to forget all about my outside problems and just focus on the game. As soon as I entered the club, it was everything I imagined it would be, with the exception of one or two things. I wondered if everyone else felt the same way about the organization as I did. Existing Research: 	During my research, I found information about the role of table tennis in international relations at the Olympic Games; this article is relevant to this essay because it shows the influence of powers around the world from the United States to China and their compromises in working together. Further research explained the situation of an elderly woman who is undergoing the early stages of Alzheimer’s disease, as well as her relation with the sport of table tennis. This article is relevant to the focus point because it shows how the sport affects the physical and mental psyche of humans. Methods: 	The methods that are incorporated within this essay include analyzing the rituals, objects, gender, and ethnicities within the club. I used these factors to convey meaning in the club and the different aspects which they show. Some other methods that I used were a two-hour field study and interviews. In the two-hour field study, I observed the activities that the club incorporates into its curriculum. Each of the three interviews that I conducted were approximately twenty minutes long.  For this essay, I performed three interviews on three anonymous sources and obtained information relevant to the club. This included information about their reasons for joining, how they heard of the organization, what they wanted to gain from the club, and even ideas for the future. What I found from these interviews was a variety of answers, as well some common acknowledgements from the club, which helped with the overall conclusion of the impacts of the club on its members. The limitations to the interview were that all the interviewees were male, two of which were students currently in attendance at KU and the other was a professor. The two students are working on their second semester and are currently living in the same dormitory as I, the researcher. Both of these students are relatively close to me because I see them every day and sometimes play a little table tennis in the dorms. Their ethnicities are Caucasian and Asian. I had never met the professor whom I interviewed before joining this club. The first time I played at the Table Tennis Club, he was the first to arrive, and we played against one another the full duration of the time. Qualities which this professor possesses include a Chinese heritage and mid-age. Results & Analysis: 	From the beginning of this research activity to the end, I gained very beneficial data in explaining the aspects of being a part of the Table Tennis Club, as well integrating table tennis into life. I gained information from the two-hour field study on the activities of the club, from the interviewees about reasons for membership and future aspects for the club, and the secondary research performed by others concerning the impact of table tennis. 	In the secondary research of impacts of table tennis in the Olympic Games (http://ire.sagepub.com), I was reminded of the United States and China and of their relationship back in 2008. The article stated, "… different balances of interest and asymmetric power relations, ‘table tennis’ diplomacy was able to help broker rapprochement between the United States and China." This event showed that through the sport of table tennis, relations can be restored and as well remind participants and audiences alike of the “good times.” 	The secondary research of the impacts of table tennis are on an Alzheimer’s patient and it showed the positive effects of table tennis on the memory capacity of Fryda Dvorak, Alzheimer’s patient (www.jewishjournal.com). The article stated,” She doesn’t remember what she had for breakfast or lunch, but she knows she hit the ball 64 times during her lesson, and that Irina lost three times...” This quote shows that when her mind is put into the game it slowly improves memory of her and was deemed a “brain sport.” The researchers of the table tennis program conducted a study on “3,000 elderly table-tennis players were shown to have increased frontal lobe function after two minutes of play.” This serves to prove the point of one of the great miracles of the sport. Table tennis helped the functions of this woman and can help everyone’s brain “get active.”	During the two-hour field study, I observed many aspects of the club. A common ritual accomplished by the club is practicing by just hitting the ball to one another. If a player should happen to not have a partner, they may set up the table tennis table so that they can verse themselves to practice. Many objects are used for the club's activities. These include an overabundance of table tennis balls (around 100), three to four table tennis tables (each complete with a net), only about five table tennis paddles since it is preferred that members buy their own, and a net to pick table tennis balls up off the ground. The gender and ethnicity were not distributed to both genders and all ethnicities. The club consisted of mostly men, for it is not usually a common sport for women. The ethnicities in this club were mostly Asian and few Caucasians; it is most likely correlated to the Asian origins of the sport. The overall analysis of this field study allowed me to conclude that the club is prepared for new members and is very active in its activities. I can conclude this from the abundance of courts, clean-up equipment, and the growing size of the club. I am also able to conclude that table tennis is a very segregated sport when it comes to gender and ethnicity, by observing that most Asians will know how to play and understand the game, while most Caucasians wouldn’t know the basics of table tennis. 	In the interviews between all three members, there were only two interview answers which were in common. There was the idea to encourage members to be a part of the organization. This can be said that the Table Tennis Club keeps their members active and happy with each other. The other answers were inconsistent such as learning experience, relaxing, and a lot of people at a variety of levels besides expert. The other interview answer that was common to the question “how do you hope the club will develop in the future” and the answer was the desire for more members to be a part of the fun experiences. I can conclude that the members would like to share this opportunity of joining the Table Tennis Club with others at the University of Kansas. Another common pattern observed were the answers of why they joined, which was because a friend joined and wanted to be there for him. The interviewees both desired to have tournaments to determine who the best is. The older interviewee had his answers consistent with his past. His reason for joining the club was that he played back in China throughout his childhood. He hoped to pass on his table tennis skills to the younger members. The more abnormal part of the study was that the professor didn’t want a tournament activity to be a part of the club, rather, he wanted more exercises to prepare for table tennis games. I can conclude that with the older generation, there is a greater want to pass on information in order to help the students improve and not be ambitious, while the younger generation wants to prove that they are the best. While there are many factors which influence the Table Tennis Club, two things which are for certain are that new members are always welcome and there is plenty of fun to be found.  Modern Barbie	The first Barbie doll was made in the late 50’s. A woman always saw her daughter playing with baby dolls and paper dolls. She had the brilliant idea of inventing an adult doll, but not just any ordinary doll. She envisioned a doll little girls aspired to be; she envisioned a doll that young girls could see themselves being. She invented a doll with a long legs, a pretty face, skinny waist, and a generous bust line. The invention was a huge success. Within days, millions of dolls were being sold. The “Barbie” doll has become an American icon. In today’s society, there is a ton of controversy of what women can and cannot do. Since the early to mid 1900’s, particularly after WWII, it was common for the women to stay at home and cook, clean, and take care of the kids. This mind set has changed. Now, women are often seen with part time, if not, full time jobs. Even though women are working, that does not mean all work forces have been fair, whether it comes to hiring purposes or wage differences. This tends to discourage the women from starting a degree, applying for a job, or asking for a raise. Barbie has recently put out an ad aiming to re-empower the women in 2015. Their goal was to remind them that anything is possible. The advertisement uses various techniques in order to accomplish this. Barbie uses different techniques to show how progressive this advertisement is; however, if you take a closer look, the advertisement itself, it is not as progressive as it could be. Nonetheless, it is still a remarkable advertisement for women today. 	In this particular advertisement, it is obvious that Barbie is targeting young women; after all, Barbie was first made for little girls. In the picture, there are seven women. Barbie wanted to give the young women of America a doll that can relate to them, a doll to look up to, a doll they could model their lives after. As previously mentioned, women today are put down constantly by coworkers, bosses, and even their peers. The ad appeals to multiple types of personalities because there are multiple professions in the picture. In front is a beautiful, blonde woman. Barbie is trying to communicate to the viewers that if anything, be a confident woman who is not afraid to do whatever she wants. Behind her are six different professions including a soccer player, office lady, ballerina, nurse, pilot, and astronaut. “Barbie” is printed in the girly, bolded, cursive lettering. Contrary to what the Barbie lettering is portraying, written below it is “If you can dream it, you can be it.” There is often a stereotype that goes along with Barbie. This has even, for some time, given the doll a bad reputation. When one thinks of a Barbie doll, the first thing that comes to mind is an absolutely perfect human being with zero flaws. This has to be one of the most common misconceptions of what message Barbie is trying to tell young women. The goal of Barbie is to empower women, to make a girl be the best version of herself, and most importantly, be confident. Together, with the way the lettering is written and the position the women are standing in, and the professions the women are portraying are actually translating a very powerful message to young woman. 	This advertisement is so simple, yet delivers a large message. However, while this is supposed to be a “groundbreaking” advertisement, it is obvious that Barbie did not make the best effort to do so. Another issue in today’s society that is often brought up is cultural diversity; perhaps Barbie tried to incorporate this. Barbie did not want to overstep these boundaries though; there is one women who looks to be Asian, and one very light skinned black woman. This advertisement still keeps the “old”. The women in the picture look presentable and are always dressed in their best. The advertisement also brings in the “new”. It brings attention to the fact that women can do anything while maintaining their femininity. The advertisement is progressive, but not quite as progressive as it could be. 	In front, is a beautiful, blonde woman who is standing confidently with her hand on her hip. Just like the advertisement for Captain America where the man is standing with a shield in front of him, hand on hip, Barbie is doing the exact same thing. In America, that is the most confident stance a woman can have. This Barbie does not have any profession in particular, or at least it is not obvious what she is. This was done on purpose; it is to remind woman that no matter what you do, however much money you make, whoever you marry, you are you. Today, it is easy to look at a woman and judge her so harshly based on little things like this. The Barbie in the center sets the stage for the rest of the dolls. If any women wants to be anything successful and thrive, it is imperative that she is confident. If one takes a deeper look into what the professions are, one might notice that half are more feminine, while the other three are a little more “masculine”. Even though a little girl may have a dream to be an astronaut, pilot, or soccer player, Barbie is telling her to be it. All of the Barbies are still themselves, too. They did not have to change themselves to be what they are. Other than the obvious women in the front of this advertisement, there are other devices used to draw in viewers. 	The seven women are standing against a black background. This emphasizes the toughness and headstrong attitude the women need to have in order to succeed. Typically “Barbie” advertisements are seen with pink backgrounds with hearts and flowers; however, this advertisement encapsulates a much different tone. Under the women, the words “If you can dream it, you can be it.”, are written in white with a pink background, mainly to make good contrast on top of the dark background. The lettering is written in bold, all capital letters. The letters are in all capital to catch the viewer’s attention; this is done to make sure it is the first thing you read. These bold letters are commonly seen in action movies, where there is a headstrong hero, with a bold title on the front. This is exactly what this advertisement is trying to mimic. They are san-serif, so less formal than usual. The letters are some that appeal to anyone, considering they are bold looking, but are still written with white and pink coloring.  Of course, above the bold lettering is the word “Barbie” in the typical white, cursive, feminine writing. This is to remind the viewers that no matter what you do, you will always be a women. 	The techniques used by the advertisers are interesting, because they appeal to the viewers in ways using pathos, color schemes, and certain types of fonts. Barbie took on a completely different mind set than most American women have; they have gone against the grain without going over the top. Instead of telling the youth of America to sit down and do as they are told, they advise the young women to step up, take action, and be in charge of their future. Women should be able to look at this advertisement and in some way, shape, or form, be inspired to do whatever they want to. When looking at the advertisement just for a quick glance, it is easy to tell what this advertisement will be about. This is one way to know it is a well thought out, visually appealing advertisement. When a women looks at this, she feels empowered and feels as though she can take on the world. 	Success and wealth are two primary aspirations facing a dramatic increase in modern day society, not only in America, but all across the world. Men and women alike find themselves looking with envy to high end designer brands as one way to embellish this feature about themselves, becoming more appealing in the eyes of those around them. Upscale retailers, common in European countries, take the duty upon themselves to keep pace with the ever growing business of fashion and couture. Gucci, part of “fashion conglomerate Kering… which is controlled by French billionaire Francois Pinault”, manufactured a Premier perfume with an alluring ad to cater to the public’s longing for simplicity, elegance, and class.Visually, the Premiere ad evokes an interest just based off of its design elements. The luxury reflected through the ad is done through simplicity above all. In its entirety, the image is black, white, and gray, apart from the perfume bottle which is champagne, typically a color associated with formality. A black setting behind the lights and action creates a contrast among the image and increases its professionality. The subtle contrast is enough of a difference to outline the product while not clashing with the overall theme. From the bottle, the city lights in the background lead the eye toward Blake Lively, the face of the ad, then move downward to notice finer details about her hairstyle, dress, and stance. As magnificent as the content in the image is, the overall message remains simple, that this perfume could aide others in living this life. The ad follows the rule of thirds, its major structure following invisible gridlines, making the photograph more visually dynamic and mathematical with its formulated composition. Likewise, subconsciously recognizing the layout as mathematical give a sense of logic. Neither crowded not cluttered, a sense of balance is achieved, leading to another solid promise that the perfume will deliver its appeal of allure. All of this considered, it is obvious that the designers of the ad mean business, and are not marketing a product that just anyone could come to obtain. The focal point of the ad is the product itself is the rectangular bottle of perfume, which is coincidentally displayed in gold. Designating gold as the color to contrast against the already sophisticated pallet emits a whole separate vibe than if it were, say, pink. The gold bottle and letters below to speak to say that it is mature and of a desired quality. The perfume featured in the ad is intended to entice others towards investing their money into a certain fragrance. Gucci, the maker of this perfume, originated in Italy during the 1920’s, and has since advanced to countries amongst the fashion industry, currently ranked the forty-second most luxury brand, according to the Forbes website. Such a prosperous company would need a desirable woman to represent them. By her beauty abiding by the social stigma, men too are reeled in by stunning looks when scanning the shelves for gift ideas for their significant other. Gucci, recognized as a primarily upper class brand, plants the thought in viewers heads that if they could just obtain this perfume as well, then they could potentially be as successful and elusive as the woman in the magazine. Blake Lively, a high end actress and model, is shown here with her hair in curls, in a sparkling and open backed dress, perched in a room made entirely of windows overlooking a big city at night. These choices reflect her status, which would in turn give customers a means of relating with her by sharing the same perfume. Every day people such as those in the working class are unlikely to be in this woman’s situation, but sharing a fragrance with her would give them something to relate with and fill them with a sense of confidence in knowing so. With Lively as the face and so well-known at that, a large target audience is put together even by just photographing her. An even bigger audience is drawn when noticing the Gucci brand. 	Physicality and the portrayal of wealth combined permit the mind of the audience to wander if investing in a small bottle of Premiere Perfume could do them a sliver of such justice.  Featured in the ad, Lively stands posed against a reflective glass window overlooking a cityscape with bright lights shining on the horizon line. The dress she wears is layered with glistening and gleaming embellishments, highlights an open back, and is encompassed by a studded watch on her wrist. A porcelain face indicates that the woman lives a stress free life, an aspiration worldwide. Gucci may help individuals accomplish this personal goal. Not only has this been done, but Lively’s reflection in the window shows her eyes coming straight back to the audience, connecting with them. In a way, this contributes to a feeling of solidarity of relating with upper class, success being a highly valued aspect of American and European culture. 	With all other details of the photo itself carefully thought out and precisely placed, Gucci then had to match the overall mood with an appropriate text. Keeping up with its precedent of simplicity, the company chose a serif heading with sans-serif captions above and beneath it. All of the lettering is white, apart from the classic brand signature, which is a gold slightly darker than the perfume bottle. The text reads “introducing the new essence for women” above and “premiere” below. Choosing such little text allows the audience more time and less opposition from conflicting visuals to appreciate the image itself and continues being minimalistic in the less impactful areas of the ad. Gucci, signed custom in gold, stands out to draw attention to the name, a status symbol in today’s society. The text makes no promises, but instead allows others to imagine what the product could do for them. In fact, the text hardly describes the product itself at all. 	Attaining such a high level of prosperity in the fashion industry and having access to some of the world’s most elite celebrities, Gucci designed its premiere perfume ad with the utmost strategy and intel. Blake Lively to draw in a large crowd of individuals who may not yet have crossed the bridge to high society, and a splendor reputation were no coincidence. Between the layout of the ad, a simple yet lavish message conveyed, an opulent company, and synchronization with the longing to succeed, the premiere perfume ad was a sure success. The Premiere Gucci ad by Blake Lively reflects the public’s longing for simplicity, elegance, and class in a way that permits individuals of all social levels are able to appreciate.   Human Development of Selective Learning As you look around, everyone is unique. Their personalities carry different traits. Even those who are brought up in the same household can end up as two different people: in their occupations, where they live, and their lifestyles. So, what makes them different? Selective learning is a theory that comes from human development that says we as humans make our own choices starting from infancy continuously throughout adulthood. Infants choose when they want to play and when they want to eat. Young children around elementary age become more selective about choices that shape their identity. Teens are concerned about keeping up with their peers. Adulthood is a different form of keeping up with their peers just at a different level. Research in social learning and selective learning shows that humans are sometimes their own product and not always a product of the world around them. Instead, Koenig explores questions concerning how children learn from others, what the characteristic signatures of social learning are, and how this learning changes over time. He argues that on some cases, humans depend on other human beings in order to access information that we search for ourselves.  We rely on others because we lack the knowledge or conceptual understanding needed to gain the relevant information ourselves. She says, “It appears that selective social learning is an early emerging feature of children’s learning more generally and that it becomes increasingly refined as children’s understandings of knowledge and the factors that affect its social transmission become more sophisticated” (Koenig p.399). Her research shows that it is both sides of people’s environment and social learning. Meanwhile, in the all stages of life from infancy to adulthood, there are different aspects among different cultures and lifestyles that help people learn about themselves and their environments. Some also struggle with others’ culture differences, such as how they were brought up in life compared to others. For example, a family of wealth may have a child that’s never had to work for anything in life. Everything was given. Whereas a child that comes from a poor family struggles from day to day on exactly how they are going to supply their needs. Koenig also says that cultural experiences will help the child learn from their own environment. Not all children have the same cultural background in common, and this gives them the standpoint to be more flexible with others and learn the process required to explore and to adapt to different behaviors of others. On another note, children also see different types of models; some are positive and some are negative. Research from Wood shows that children often copy what benefits them. Wood illustrates infants’ ability to differentiate between those who act competently versus incompetently. He posits, for example, that seven year olds copy their peers who are rated as being more competent. He emphasizes this point in his research with the “Trust” paradigm. “The ‘Trust’ paradigm, whereby children are introduced to one reliable model and one unreliable model, has demonstrated that, from infancy to six-year-old, children consistently copy reliable models over unreliable labelers for novel words and artefact us” (Wood p. 343). Sabbagh talks about this: “As children and adults interact, adults indirectly teach children how to make inferences about behavior, causality, natural categories, and human intentions”. (Sabbagh page 400). This supports the theory that young children make specific choices during development in early childhood. Those specific choices are especially significant when there is a level of trust between people. In fact, this affects how infants learn.Cunnington gives some useful data stating that a lack of trust effects learning. “Another article considers how the typical structure of formal learning opportunities across cultures might be more or less conductive to children’s expressions of doubt and skepticism”. (Cunnington page 402). Trust plays a huge part in a person’s development. “A large body of research conducted over the past decade has shown that preschoolers learn selectively from some individuals over others.” In his article, Poulin explores the developmental origins of selective social learning during infancy. “The results of (…)  studies indicate that infants are sensitive to a number of cues, including competence, age, and confidence, when deciding from whom to learn”. (Poulin page 61). Aside from the interpersonal trust, the environment also has important aspects that affects the child’s future dreams.  Children often set a standard goal about what they want to be in life even if it is realistic or not, such as being a super hero or a doctor. When they focus their minds on their imaginations of fulfilling that dream, it becomes unstoppable. As they prosper into achieving their goals, the level of confidence within that person goes up significantly, knowing that they can conquer just about anything that stands in their way. For example, growing up in a city can motivate children for a more competitive environment job opportunity. On the other hand, the opposite argument would be that children’s actions and choices might be limited by environmental factors. A child’s options are influenced by the characteristics of their environment such as the family’s income, education, and the child’s peers. A child plays a role in their own development, but a family’s lower income would hinder the child’s abilities in financial choices and options. Although the child can basically choose where they want to go to college, those kids who don’t have a lot of money have fewer opportunities to pick where they want to go based on their limited financial circumstances. The child may be eager to do all the right things to be successful but with these issues having such a huge impact, it makes the process of achieving whatever the person wanted to do in life become a lot harder. That could even cause the child to lose focus, so they begin to hang out with the wrong group of friends who don’t intend on doing anything with their life. For example, they may sell or do drugs and go to parties every weekend. The following quote talks about how the moral informant is important for children’s decisions about trust. The environment decides who that informant is going to be. So, the children’s decision making is influenced by both the interpersonal trust and the environment which is going to supply the informant to the child. “Given that we were interested in whether moral behavior (good or bad) would guide children’s trust decisions, it is important that children recognize the individual who is their moral informant. Thus, we focused our next analyses on those children who successfully discriminated the more moral of the two informants to determine whether they used that information to guide their preferences for whom to trust and, if so, whether such preferences would evince a valence bias in either a positive or a negative direction”. (Sabine page 70). Who they choose to trust could lead this child that had intentions of going to college and becoming a future doctor or lawyer behind bars or their days in life could be cut short because of their family history of financial struggles lead them to give up and lose hope in making their dreams become a reality. We often see ourselves having so many aspirations in life. We give advice and we take advice, and our local backgrounds of the different environments that we come from can make us who we are today or plant a seed of what we shall become, whether that is good or bad. Each individual as an infant to an adult is born with the gift of learning. How to use that gift, either coming from a low-income family or privileged family, should give that person a push to try even harder to become the first person in their family to do so. As we come to the conclusion of viewing both points in human development, selective learning may or may not make a person who they have become today. It is stated that these factors of different culture standpoints give both arguments over this topic. The selective theory shows that people copy from others based what they observe including if it is a negative or positive affect. Dr. Wood illustrated, as research shows, that children often copy what benefits them. (Wood p. 343). However, the environment also affects the person by financial and other opportunities and how that affects their future. In this paper, I tried to illustrate two kinds of development: human selective learning and the effect of the environment. Both are critical theories that could influence a person’s lifestyle.                                                             Pushy Parents chasing lost dreams Placed on this planet we call earth with the help of gravity Here I stand as a young human being  developing my strengths and weaknesses as the years rapidly pass by my parents were right there by my side making my decisions and pushing me to my limits. Only time could tell just when my parents would start vicariously living through there very own child and that person was me.  Education played a huge factor in my childhood life my parents stayed on me constantly about making all A’s in school and always making the honor roll list. Mainly my parents were really strict about me attending so many activities simply because I had a busy schedule so there weren't so many fun times I had growing up as a child. Competitiveness came in the picture well I have so much God gifting talent in my sport of track and field. Five days a week of practicing my sport took up so much time that there was no room for distractions. Including my summertime was very limited I attended summer track and field as well where I travel and competed against other top runners in the world. With my experience with track and field I  gained so many friends who parents brought them up just like me. And we would attend practice together and homework as well. However, the importance of this whole journey was to go to school get in education and receive a full ride scholarship in my sport as well . In this paper we will discuss how pushy parents can either turn their children and competitive motivators in their life and make them successful in their careers. Or as they grow older being pushy could effect them throughout there childhood it could cause them to avoid their pushy parents and they are now mentally protective of letting people in their lives. The most hardest thing for a parent is letting their child live their own life and make their own decisions. Some parents just can’t face the fact that their child isn’t academically gifted but may be very will outstanding and sports. I personally will be inputting into my essay based on parents who push their children to their full potential on the other hand not only that the parents may take it too far where they start to relive their loss hopes and dreams to their child. Although these parents who are trying to make up for their own mistakes and unfulfilled dreams this topic will conclude that parents may derive pleasure and meaning. For example a child could grow up knowing all the facts about their parents and knowing this college or sport they wanted to attend and accomplish but instead mistakes and doubt came along so they didn't get a chance to meet there own expectations. This is why this topic is so important to me so parents who are more likely to hope that their child fulfills their own broken dreams and when they see their kid as a part of themselves they can open their eyes and realize that this isn’t the right thing to do. Seeing your child as a part of you doesn’t mean that the child wants to be just like you. Understanding the fact that the child is your own flesh and blood makes it harder for parents to let their own children create their own decisions rather if the decision is right or wrong the child has to learn how to learn from their mistakes and if that never happens then it will never be possible for the child to grow up and learn on his or her own. Pushy parents tend to hover over their children in the ages of 7-18 . Growing up as a child my parents expected so much of me mistakes wasn’t an option and if so they will teach me how to learn from them but the sad part about it is I could never teach myself simply because I didn’t know how. Watching and growing up around other children in school who attend is so many birthday parties and activities that they pounds allowed them to almost every weekend. When high school came about it became even more harder I got judge so much on how my parents were so strict and always on top of me such as me not getting the free will of going outside to play before taking care of my homework. Being a kid in school and knowing that your parents wouldn’t let you fail in life didn’t really bother me much. It was obvious to me that my friends had too much freedom and was simply lied to the parents about where they were going after school and who they were going with. Around this time in my generation so many young girls in high school or in their teens wind up pregnant. And I believe it was simply because there  parents didn’t care too much about them and their actions or wasn’t always around and on top of them making sure that they were about business in education. As I personally understood what It meant to stay focus in life and determination and so many accomplishments was the only words I knew my heart desired and hunger for being the top and most competitive student athlete in high school. My journey through my freshman year was really mentally tough for me I begin to feel like I didn’t fit in simply because my friends that I thought were my friends had so much freedom than I did I wasn’t able to go to parties on the Friday night or attend the movies on a Saturday night. And I thought crushing on a boy or bring in the boy around definitely wasn’t an option so boys growing up really didn't mean too much to me either truth be told my first love was track and field. It became more than just a sport to me it meant extremely a lot the hard work and dedication seem to really start playing off. However,I attended state and all relays and knowing that I was the only freshman on my team that made varsity and getting a chance to surround myself with a great group of girls who admired my mindset that my parents had taught me to be. personally  I was given the chance to really be myself  it was the  most uplifting feeling. That you’re my team and I won our 12 national championship in track and field we had also made the history running the fastest 4by4 in the country of high school girls. In the blink of an eye it was time for those girls to graduate and move on to there college careers. And there I was left alone my sophomore year came around and I had became the one who was just a freshman on the team full of seniors . To a sophomore where incoming freshman knew I was and was aware of what I was capable of doing far as my talents. Some of the freshman girls looked up to me while others just wanted to defeat and conquer me. And there was once again given the opportunity to go to state and my open event the 300 hurdles I’ll placed second that year. My parents came back and took a picture of pushing me even more harder making sure that my junior was going to be for sure my year that I will get the gold  in the 300 hurdles Not only that it is the most important year colleges and scouts begin to look at you to see if you fit their interest into becoming one of their very own athletes. Knowing that college in education was a huge factor in my parents lives track and field was the only way that college would be free for me and paid and giving my parents less stress and very much relieved knowing that their child has t the talent of getting a free ride of education. And finally it was time school started back up track season had just begun phone calls left and right of different colleges  that were interested in me of attending their college and running for them as well. It was obvious to me that my parents were very proud of me this is something they always wanted their child to be successful. As the offers came about my senior was finally here my last and final year to accomplish so much and remain top 10 of my class and fastest runner on the tack. Winning my last gold and running a nations top best time was a great feeling I finally chose the school I wanted to spend my next four years I committed to being a Kansas Jay hawk.  As I grew older I attended to look back on my childhood and did the research of what we call today pushy parents there are so much good and bad’s in this research topic. Due to so much results of different sources of pushy parents and how their children turn out to be wasn’t all bad in fact some young adults who grew up looking back on their childhood just as I did. They  realize and understand who and what caused them to be successful and the results were there pushy parents and how controlling in they were  throughout their childhood although the young adult didn’t have much fun memories growing up with their friends or other activities they attend to see the good in their careers and what potentials him or her has accomplished in their life simply because of their controlling parent who made them who they are today. There pushy parents has driven them to never quit and to never stop pushing Forward  in life and letting them understand taking no for an answer isn’t an option. Striving for what you want is simply the key and they thank their parents for keeping them focused and continuously staying on top of them has definitely caused him to succeed more than others who didn't experience of having pushy parents in there life. As you see being pushy doesn't always turn out to be a bad thing it could most likely turn your child to being a mature up going most driven motivated person in their life.  As I try to separate all the good from the bad it seems of more results of the bad will always over conquer a good. There are all types of pushy parents out there there are so many results that will help explain the actions of so-called stage moms or sports dads who push there sometimes unwilling children to become stars with this founding evidence of pushy parents it has brought to  my attention that this can lead to something much more bigger than what we think. It shows that the children can suffer from mental health stage in the child’s life some children may never speak up for themselves to tell the parents this is something they don’t want to be or do in their life. Is that the child or teen will continue fulfilling their parents lost dreams simply because they have been raised to knowing how much it means to their parents. There is also a time refer to what we like to call a ‘helicopter mum’ it’s a middle-class. Who hovers over  they’re offspring by interfering in every part of their lives. The worst examples of helicopter parenting include previously unheard-of behaviors like parents attending their adult children's job interviews or calling college professors to argue over a grade. Meanwhile, their kids emerge from childhood without basic survival skills like how to cook, clean or do their own laundry. Another thing  It has been in effect on children they’re the type of mothers who push their daughters more than their sons  as the early age of 10 years old. As a child gets older they come to a conclusion that they’re pushing mom can be a bit too pushy. It has been a study revealed that controlling mother’s damage the relationship with their daughters. On the other hand however, these parents who are trying to make up for their own mistakes and loss hopes and dreams their children grow up not knowing what they want in life.  Trying to find themselves they tend to be really hard on their selves more then their own parents already are. Finally as I have shown you both sides of the good and bad of  pushy parents chasing lost dreams who push their children and are living vicariously through them . The child or teen can develop so much as they grow older and they will realize that their pushy parents made a huge impact in their lives or could be a huge disaster in their lives. As a living example that person was me that turned out to be the most mature young adult most driven motivated person in her life with the help of my parents who protected me from so many distractions that could ruin my opportunity of a Full ride as a student athlete here at University of Kansas I'm personally thankful for my pushy parents. Why Safe Spaces Shouldn’t Have to be on College Campuses	Millennials are the generation of bad reputations. Our elders, news outlets, and sometimes even Millennials themselves judge them as sensitive, offended twenty-somethings who can’t face reality. For skeptics, Millennials are viewed as the reason for safe spaces, trigger warnings, and much of the protesting in society. Many college campuses have adopted safe spaces. The idea behind this is a campus classroom is an area that students and staff can express themselves without fear of feedback, offensive material, and discrimination. In hindsight, this idea appeals to Millennials and those who want to avoid any offensive material or people. 	The problem with these safe spaces is that the idea itself is contradictory. It goes against the principles of universities and their foundations that they were built on. They contradict the concept of broadening a students’ mind and reality. 	Universities are built on the concept that the paying students are there for an education; to learn and discover the world in a mature way. To achieve that, an intellectual, educational conversation is required in classrooms, lectures, and discussions. They’re learning the world’s history, it’s potential futures, it’s politics, people, and all the different cultures. If an entire campus was to be a safe space, which is the case at many universities, crucial periods and eras of world history cannot be discussed. In American history alone, there are difficult topics; Women’s Liberation Movement, slavery, westward expansion, and politics. Many of these topics can be offensive to all types of people, minorities, racial groups, men, women, transgenders, people of all sexual orientations, and those of different social classes. Although, these professors, TAs, or whoever else is teaching has expertise and special training on these subjects and ideas. If those ideas cannot be discussed, those students paying would not receive a proper education, a worldly education. 	Most students attending college are anywhere from 18-24 and it is typically their first time living away, completely independent from their parents. But, parents also send their children to college to prepare them for a job, for the real world. Therefore, the young adults there are, ultimately, attempting to become independent, knowledgeable people. They’re trying their best at an attempt to prepare for the real world. But the reality of a safe space is, it is not the real world. It’s foolish for an 18-year-old to believe that they’re future boss is going to make their work environment a safe space where no one will be offended. Discrimination, racism, and crude people exist in the world and will never go away or disappear. The real world is harsh and a safe space prolongs the sheltering and coddling that simply will not last forever. Being exposed to prejudice is nearly inevitable in a person’s life. Getting that exposure in college is an area where students still have unlimited access to counseling, support groups, and other resources where they can learn to deal with it in a healthy manner. Exposure to the real world and culturing one’s mind is why students have been going to college for decades. 	The definition of a safe space is contradicting a worldly education. The idea that students can say what they want without fear of negative feedback, is almost the opposite of what an education is trying to achieve. Students need feedback to grow as a student and as an adult. If a student feel they can’t state their opinion or isn’t receiving necessary feedback, it is hindering the education that they’re paying for. College students should receive feedback on their work, speeches, essay, that’s what perfecting an education is about. The real world dishes out feedback, positive or negative, and students should learn to cope with that in college when, again, they have the resources they need. 	Millennials have spun the idea of a safe space too far. Though many refuse to accept the fact that biases, sexism, racism, and prejudice are not something that can be wiped clean out of the world, any acts of such crude behaviors and mindsets should not be tolerated. Universities and colleges should have a no tolerance policy, which nearly all do, and if not, then the state laws should play into account. No student, person, or human being should have to put up with any malicious act. Even in the real world away from college campuses, those typically are not tolerated if reported. 	A university should also enforce a rule of campus wide respect. There’s no guarantee that every student will be respectful, but there’s also no guarantee that they will be in the real world either. There’s no guarantee the barista at Starbucks will be respectful, but that doesn’t stop someone from ordering their everyday cappuccino. When discussing the colonization of the United States, the Holocaust, or the Civil Rights Movement, students should be respectful. Those are crucial topics to a college and worldly education that cannot afford to not be discussed. Free speech is a constitutional right, with exceptions or malicious or terrorist speech or acts, but respect is a duty and obligation by every human being. Safe spaces shouldn’t have to be on college campuses, universities and colleges should take precautionary policies to ensure a safe campus. Yet, students cannot ask for safe spaces, they’re paying for a realistic and broad education that should not be hindered by safe spaces.  Conceal and Worry 	As the world continues to evolve so does technology. A certain technological advance that has been seen is guns. Guns and other weapons are like none we have seen before. Manufactures advances on these lethal weapons have made them a) more attracting to costumers and b) more dangerous. As the United States has seen a record number of shootings the main question now is, should conceal and carry be accepted on college campuses? A number of campuses around the United States have already been forced to permit the carry of firearms, but students reactions to this decision are divided. 	Arkansas, Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, Mississippi, Oregon, Utah, Tennessee, Texas and Wisconsin are states that have passed the conceal and carry on campuses. Looking back on the history of school shootings in the United States, The Texas holds the spot of number 4 for the 10 deadliest school shootings. Other universities have seen shootings, but not nearly as deadly. Those universities are The Umpqua Community College in Oregon shooting on October 1, 2015, and Wichita State University in Kansas shooting on August 8, 2015. That poses that question; if there have already been fatalities on these campuses, why allow guns to become more accessible and sanctioned? This question is just one question that allows for the controversy among students that if guns are more accessible and permitted would they help to protect or help to destroy? There are two main views of students and the permission of conceal and carry; 1. The opposed and 2. The those in favor. 	 I am on the opposed side of conceal and carry. I believe that being able to purchase guns and carry them on campuses raises the chances of students becoming more endangered, rather than protected. The argument is that it will keep students safer, but if a shooting were to happen, the chances of a college student that spends a couple of hours in the gun range actually hitting the shooter is slim to none. With the large amount of students living in dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and other school affiliated living spaces, it would be easy for another student to steal the gun. College is known for the partying lifestyle that includes alcohol and drugs and adding guns into the mix is not the answer.	According to the website, http://concealedcampus.org, which is an organization for conceal and carry, there are multiple arguments students pose against conceal and carry. Some arguments made are; guns on campuses would distract students from learning, there would be an increase of college suicides, and tasers are as effective as guns against an assailant. I agree with these arguments because I know that if there were guns on my campus and I was in class I would be on edge wondering if someone would just break out and start shooting. I also think that the rate of suicides could increase because guns are the most common and successful way to commit suicide. It would also be way easier for them to commit it because they would have easier access to a gun. I would carry a taser as a weapon to defense instead of a gun because a taser is just as effective and there is no chance that the taser could just go off. College campuses are one of the biggest “prey” grounds for sexual assault and I think if I were ever in that situation pulling out a taser over a gun would be more effective. If I were to pull out a gun there is a sense of fear in that I could kill this person, whereas if I pulled out a taser, there is fear but I also could tase them and get away. Guns are a killing tool and having them around campuses adds to the pressure and fear of college. 	Guns on college campuses are becoming more relevant due to the conceal and carry law being passed on several campuses in different states. Banning guns on campuses would not be taking away the second amendment right from citizens, it would simply keep students and professors safer. Every amendment has rules and regulations with it, and guns are no exception to those rules. In 2017, guns will be allowed on the University of Kansas’ campus and many students fear their own safety. This may change later, but as of now all that can be done is make students aware of what to do in the case of a shooting and in the case that a gun is pulled on them. Safety measures should be taken to ensure everyone is as safe as possible on campus and that no one feels like they cannot attend class or go to an event or place for fear of their safety. 	In today’s world there are 1.1 billion tobacco users.  As years pass by, the number of users are expected to increase to 1.6 billion. I am afraid that the majority of the people who smoke do not know that one-half of the people who smoke die from smoking related diseases such as heart and lung disease. There are two important parts of the human body that play a huge role. Did you know smoking could cause several different types of cancers among the bladder, lungs, and throat? Still until this day tobacco remains the largest preventable cause of death and disease in the United States. Due to cigarette smoking more than 480,000 Americans are killed each year. At the same time more than 41,000 of those deaths have been exposed to secondhand smoking. This advertisement should be an eye opener to make cigarette smokers want to stop as soon as possible because, like the ad says, “Smoking kills ... so why bother starting?” I believe many people fail to realize that smoking does not only hurt you on the inside it hurts you on the outside, as well. Smoking cigarettes can cause unattractive problems such a bad breath and stained teeth. Not to mention smoking can cause gum disease and may damage your sense of taste. When you smoke your skin ages faster and begins to look dull and grey, this is because smoking reduces the amount of oxygen your body observes.	I like the ad because just by looking at it you can already tell it is trying to persuade people not to smoke. I believe the hand loading the gun with cigarettes is a great way to show that no matter who the gun is pointed at or fired at the person the cigarette hits will begin to die slowly. The moment you smoke your first cigarette is the moment you begin to kill yourself. Once you start, it is hard to stop. It is obvious that the more you smoke the more your brain adjusts to the tobacco and the more you want.	As a young teen, I believe this ad is for young people who do not smoke. He result of the ad is to get nonsmokers not to smoke. The reason is that in the future the statistics should not increase. With the statistics of smokers decreasing, the cigarette companies will begin to decrease due to the product not being sold as much. The outcomes that are listed above will grab nonsmokers’ attention by making them realize that smoking really hurts. Although they will know what can happen to them, will it stop nonsmokers from smoking? No, in my opinion, for some people it takes them to actually go through a bad outcome for them to stop. The goal of this ad is to keep people from smoking. The ad shows pathos, an emotional appeal that there is no good outcome from smoking. I feel like the creator of the ad used the image of a gun with cigarettes as bullets to scare people. At the same time the ad uses logos, a logical appeal to give people reasons not to smoke. That can be effective but should have ethos to be more effective. Just because smoking can cause cancer and gum disease it does not mean it will happen. It can all be avoided by not smoking.	The creator uses the tone to be more sad, scary, and serious. The reason behind this is that there is a gun with cigarette bullets front and center of the ad and with the word “kill” big and bold. With that being there it should instantly make you think about dying from smoking. Everyone knows that a gun is nothing to play with so that makes you stay away from them. A gun with cigarette bullets should make you want to stay away more, especially since you know what cigarettes can do to you. With the words being big and bold it causes the audience to know immediately that smoking kills. Right under that it asks, “So why bother starting?” This gives an idea that if you know smoking kills then why would you want to smoke?	With me thinking that the ad is for young adults and teens I do not believe it meets the cultural standards. The reason is because in today’s culture most teen and young adults are trying to prepare for their future, get things that are instant gratification, stuck on social media or smoking just to be cool. Just because we see it, does not mean we will pay attention and get into it. Also the ad does not meet the cultural standards because it is not attractive enough. I feel that if I were to be looking for a nonsmoking ad, I would not find it in a place where I know most teens and young adults keep their heads which is in their phone. The one place I think I would find it is in an old magazine that is just laying around. So how would teens get the message if it is not in a more common place for teens.	The ad that I have and the ad my partner has many differences and similarities. The ad my partner has is an ad that has a hand smoking a child. Above the hand smoking the child there are sentences say “Smoking.” “Pleasure for you.” “Poison for your family.” With that being in the ad I believe that is saying that you are making yourself happy but hurting your family. It has been proven from many smokers that smoking is stress releasing. At the same time that you are releasing your stress, you are hurting yourself and your family. Your family knows that you smoking is hurting yourself and will soon hurt the family. With the family knowing you smoke they will try to persuade you to stop. At the bottom of the ad there are bolded words that say “Quit Smoking.” “Now.” I feel that the ad is giving smokers a heads up that something bad will happen if they continue smoking.  My ad is to prevent nonsmokers from starting and my partner’s ad is to persuade smokers to stop right away. At the same time both ads are trying to prevent people from smoking. If the ad were directed towards certain genders and ages it would be more effective. The reason it would be more effective is because it is directed to young or old, men or women.As a result after listening all the facts above and explaining both ads they can be better. The ways they can be better is if they were in the places that most teens look and if they were more direct. Also if they had pictures of the people they were directing the ads to they would really make people thing twice about smoking a cigarettes. There are many things you can do besides smoking. Instead of creating a negative impact on your life and other lives think about how much better it would be to make a positive impact instead. Smoking kills so stay away and to those who do quit as soon as possible. 	Is Hotel California about Satanism? Many people believe that the hotel that is in Hotel California is a satanic hotel.  There is a lot of skepticism over the topic of that hotel. This song has many interpretation and many just depend on the individual.  Although many people have argued about how nice the song is and their love for the Eagles, a careful examination suggests that it is also a satanic place.  	The song starts simply, he is driving through the desert while smoking pot.  Then he got tired had to stop for the night and just then, he saw a hotel in the distance with a girl standing at the door.  My guess is he saw the girl and thought it was a perfect place to stay.  Then, he heard mission bells and he wasn’t sure if he should stay there, but he ended up going and she was taking him down to a room. At night he says he hears voices that wake him up at night. 	“Satanism is a topic that many people would prefer to ignore despite the fact that for some it has become a way of life, a philosophy, indeed, a religion” (Satanism:). A Satanist is a person who worships the devil and they do some weird stuff so that they can please him. When they do worships they have been known to do things such as making “a young teenage girl, impregnated during a satanic ritual, is forcibly delivered of her nearly term baby, forced to ritually kill the child and then to cannibalize its heart as cult members watch” (hard). Why would someone make someone kill their own kid and eat its heart I am fine with people following whatever religion they would like, but it is going a bit far with “putting a young girl is thrown into an electrified cage with wolves and ritually tortured to deliberately produce a "wolf personality," part of her multiple personality disorder (MPD)” (hard). “The common adult victim[15] is a white woman between the ages of twenty-five and forty-five with a previous history of non-specific psychological problems, often a history of suicide attempts, and who is either intensely religious (usually evangelical or charismatic Protestant), or who comes from an intensely religious background or exposure ” (hard).  “The abuse includes emotional (terrifying threats, deliberate heightening of fear, etc.), physical (beating, cutting, etc.), sexual (incest, mutilation of sexual organs, etc.), and spiritual (threats that God won't forgive, Jesus is defeated, etc.)” (hard).  There was also a case where “a San Jose man accused of killing his high school classmate for the thrill of it allegedly told police detectives that he had planned the attack for weeks and that it was endorsed by his religion, Satanism” (Teen).	On the surface, this song sounds like it could just be about a few guys that have gone to California and found a nice hotel (so they think) as they smoke marijuana which is found in the line, "Warm smell of colitas rising up through the air" (snopes).  This line makes me wonder if this might just be a song about the rock and roll California life style.  “The synthesis of 1960’s and 1970’s was fueled by hallucinogens, as if drugs were the natural meeting point of the bard, the punk and the sound sculptor” (History).  “Drugs were conveniently available and stood for the opposite of what the hated Establishment stood for (war, bourgeois life, discipline, greed, organized religion, old-fashioned moral values)” (History).	The song Hotel California is interesting because it has two different meanings and it is up to the listener to decide which path they want to go down.  There is a line in the song that says, "We are all just prisoners here, of our own device, and in the master's chambers" (snopes).   This is a good line and to be honest, it really makes me think.  At first when I think about it, I think that the prisoners are ourselves, the device is our inner fears and demons and the chamber is our mind.  However, there are some lines that sound more like it would be a satanic song than anything else such as, "you can check out anytime you like, but you can never leave" (snopes).  To me, these sounds like it would be a satanic song.  A hotel where you can never leave sounds like it is kidnapping and would be pretty scary. In the song, he states that there is a feast and that people are “stabbing it, but they just can’t kill the beast” (snopes).  Thinking of it as a satanic song; I think the beast could be a human and to think that they could be eating a human being freaks me out.	The Eagles are an American rock band formed in Los Angeles in 1971 by Glenn Frey, Don Henley, Bernie Leadon, and Randy Meisner.  These four people were the authors of the song Hotel California and they wanted the song to be about "the dark underbelly of the American Dream, and about excess in America which was something we knew about"(Hotel).  The intended audience was the music lovers of that age.  There are many Eagles fans out there and the song was for them and for them to enjoy.  The purpose was to write a song about "the journey from innocence to experience" and to show what the American dream really is.  Many people think that the American dream is easy, but it can actually be awful because you will have to step on people and make some enemies if you want to be on top. It’s awful that that’s the way that it is but unfortunately that’s the way that we have made it.	What kind of things lead to the making of Hotel California?  The contribution came from the rock and roll life style.  There were a lot of bands at the time who were making songs and doing drugs and they eventually started making songs that could be interpreted as satanic, some people made their songs sound that way and some songs sound like they are saying things about the devil.  For Hotel California, if you play it backwards then it will say things about Satan.  I have no idea what it does say about him, however, I know that it say Satan.  I have wondered in the past whether they mean to do this or not.  It seems like it would be tough to make it say that when you rewind it. Would it be as easy as word choice or instrument sounds or even changing the sounds of words to make it easier to hear this?	The effects that this song had on people was, in many ways, was good.  Many people liked it and it caused people to flack to this band in hopes of other eye opening and mind blowing songs.  The reactions and reviews of Hotel California were great; however, these reactions soon turned sour when people thought that it was satanic.  People were boggled that the Eagles would write such a song about Satanism; personally, I did not know how or why the Eagles would write about this.  This was a great song, but at the same time, the hidden meaning and how you can play it backwards and hear something about Satan freaks me out a little bit.  How would it be possible to play it backwards and hear them saying things about Satan in the first place; would it be as easy as using certain words? Maybe they can make it sound that way because of the way they pronounce some of the words or the way they play their instruments.  They could possibly make it sound that way because of how they mess with the song and add sound effects.  I have always been so interested it how it is possible to do that because it seems like it would be hard to do it.	This song has affected society since it was released by inspiring other bands to write songs backwards. Some of these songs are “Nightmare/The Dream Time” by Motorhead or “Another One Bites The Dust” by Queen (Here’s). Many others have done the same thing as the Eagles have done and have done it in the same kind of way.  The Eagles made theirs through song and now, many more songs are doing the same things.  Some of them are keeping theirs Satanism; but others, like Beyoncé, in the song single ladies talks about not only Satanism, but also the Illuminati (BeyoncÃ).  	 “Central to Satanism was the idea of magic and that extraordinary miracles, if not performed by God in answer to the prayer of one of his servants (i.e., a Christian), had to be accomplished by the devil in cooperation with someone who had made a pact with the devil” (Satanism.). On Walpurgisnacht, April 30, 1966, Anton LaVey founded the "The Satanic Church" (which he would later rename the "Church of Satan") (Satanism.).	As I have shown, many people have their own interpretation, their own ideas of what this song means.  There has been a lot of sceptisism regarding this song; however, it has also helped people see that they might want to be a part of this religion. The choice, however, is yours to make. Do you think it is Satanic or not? Writing Project 1: Context Analysis of a Song	World Peace. It’s what children think of the world when they are young. It’s what young adults protest and rally for. It’s what scholars and professors think about as if it is some touchable reality.  It’s something that everybody says they want in the world, but no one takes the actions needed to achieve it. In 1971, the world was a completely different place. It was a place filled with war and conflict between almost every corner of the earth. There were people dying for a cause that they didn’t believe in. There were people getting into fights about whether or not they believed in the same God. There were countries that sabotaged their people’s well-being just to prove a political point. Nothing seemed to be going right. But, on October 11th, 1971, John Lennon released his single ‘Imagine’ to the world and little did we know it would change it. 	John Lennon’s song ‘Imagine’ is arguably one of the greatest songs ever because of how he relates to current issues during that time period. To understand this song, you need to understand who John Lennon is. John Lennon was born January 9th, 1940 in Liverpool, England. He grew up in England and slowly transformed into a man full of musical talent. He joined a bands throughout his teenage years, and then in 1964 he joined the Beatles. This gave Lennon this publicity and media attention that turned him into the famous musician he is today. Throughout his years with the Beatles, Lennon made great music that transformed the ways he made his music. Before the production of this song, Lennon was influenced by many musical experience he had with his bands, mainly the Beatles. When he was with the Beatles, they transformed pop culture. For example, in the week of April 4th, 1964, the Beatles held the top five spots on the billboard (Rolling Stone). Even though the Beatles were very popular, Lennon slowly started to drift away for multiple reasons. First, Lennon’s girlfriend was getting in the way of the bands production in the studio which made the other members upset. Secondly, Lennon felt like he couldn’t express himself equally throughout the band. This is the main reason Lennon left the band in September of 1969. As he started to develop his solo music career, Lennon could finally 100% speak his mind. Then on October 11th, 1971 Lennon released ‘Imagine’. This was Lennon genuinely putting his thoughts into lyrics. With this song, Lennon wanted to make a change in how people thought of his music. The purpose was for his audience to think about the world around them and just imagine a life of peace and happiness. He didn’t exactly want to create his idea, he just wanted his “dreamers” (AZ Lyrics) to imagine what he does. Lennon was an excellent song writer and musician and his previous works affected how he wrote ‘Imagine’. John Lennon wrote ‘Imagine’ and released it in 1971. It was an immediate hit across the globe. Many people were touched by the reality and passion of the song’s meaningful lyrics. When writing this song, John Lennon did not have a specific audience. If anything, John Lennon wanted everybody in the world to hear this song and absorb this lyrics and their meaning. Unfortunately, not everybody fully comprehended the meaning of his song. For example, John Lennon stated this: “The World Church called me once and asked, “Can we use the lyrics to ‘Imagine’ and just change it to ‘Imagine one religion’?” That showed [me] they didn’t understand it at all. It would defeat the whole purpose of the song, the whole idea. ” This example explains that not everybody understood what Lennon was trying to convey. During this period there were a lot of different world events. First, the Vietnam War was still lingering on. This took a huge toll on American society in many different ways. (U.S. Anti-Vietnam War) There were college and societal protests across the country protesting the war. There were millions and millions of dollars being spent on a war that some Americans didn’t even understand. Secondly, there were families and children that watched their parent or loved one walk away to never come back. The Vietnam War played a huge role in John Lennon’s overall message in the song. Lennon wanted peace between all people in the world and the Vietnam War was a driving message behind that. Secondly, the U.S. and Russia were in the mist of the Cold War. The United States was strategically battling with Russia on how to stop the spread of communism. When hearing this song, some people made the assumption that John Lennon was a communist. John Lennon said that this song can be very easily interpreted to support communism, but it specifically did not. While hearing lyrics, you can easily understand that Lennon was not trying to portray communism, but instead strive for world peace and human harmony. Lastly, during this time period there were a lot of religious movements and battles.  During the 1960’s there was a revolution of new churches that were challenging the classic, historical church (The Socialist Party of Great Britain). Many people, young and old, started to look into new religions and this caused some additional conflict. John Lennon mentions imagining there is no heaven or hell in his song and this challenges his audience to throw religion out the window. Overall, John Lennon mentioned many different current events that led to his overall purpose in his song. Lennon wanted everybody to forget about whether they believe in one religion or whether they are from a different culture and just respect people equally for who they are. Lennon wanted his audience to imagine the world living as one and enjoying their life peacefully. If his audience could even imagine this for a few brief moments, they would understand Lennon’s lyrics. The audience would understand and share the same dream as Lennon. This was his purpose and goal for the song. Lennon wanted his audience to take a step back and just think “what if”. This could change the way they look at their possessions, their car, their job, their life, and their world. This is all Lennon wanted.	  Ever since the release of this song on October 11th, 1971, it was an instant hit and lyrical masterpiece.  As soon as the song released, it started climbing the billboards all around the world. Within three weeks the chart topped at #3 on the Billboard Hot 100 in the United States and later topped the charts as #1 in England. This was the best single of John Lennon’s career and the world reacted well. This song had an effect on most people because it was so authentic and his audience could relate to it. For example, Jimmy Carter, President of the United States from 1977-1981, said: “In many countries around the world… you hear John Lennon’s song ‘Imagine’ used almost equally with national anthems”. People admired this song for what it is and what Lennon was trying to tell his audience. It was a hopefully sign for peace among different cultures, religions, countries, and most importantly people. With so much going on in the world, everyone would hear this song and take a second and think about what is going on. People cherished this song because of Lennon’s idea and his bold approach of starting the song saying: “Imagine there’s no heaven”. Although with every great piece of music comes some criticism. According to John Blaney, a proclaimed author, the song was “riddled with contradictions” (Wikipedia). Many people took this song way to seriously, as of John Lennon was trying to get people to revolt to create peace. John Lennon didn’t want any sort of violence, he just wanted people to imagine peace. Lennon wanted his listeners to imagine what it would be like to live in a world without borders or religion. He was not trying to persuade anything upon his audience, just simply making them imagine. Even well after the song released, John Lennon, himself, couldn’t even imagine the kind of reactions the song received. John Lennon was being praised because he made people think and imagine about how the world could be. He truly showed the world how one song can change the way people think about others.	Since 1971, John Lennon’s song ‘Imagine’ has continued to effect society. There have been countless number of times that popular artists have performed the song. The major time frame that the song was performed was in 1980 after John Lennon was assassinated. Performers such as Elton John, Queen, and Stevie Wonder have performed the song in John Lennon’s honor. Also, since 2005 the song has played at the ball drop at the New Year’s Eve Party in Time Square New York City. Not only has this song been performed by popular artists, but it has also been influential in rough world situations. For Example, Madonna performed the song in 2005 when the Indonesian tsunami occurred (Madonna.com). She played the lyrically enchanting song at a tsunami fundraising relief event and it was a major success. This song was meant for this type of moment. When there is a country or person in need of help, this song is uplifting to show that there can be peace on earth if all humans cooperate. Another example is when Neil Young performed ‘Imagine’ after 9/11 at a tribute for all the heroes on that day. Again, this song brought an unparalleled amount of hope and gratitude for the citizens of the United States, all of who were suffering and trying to understand this tragedy. My last example was the latest big act of terrorism in the world. This was the terrorism act in Paris just a month ago. Throughout this mourning period, a group of activists again sang this song. This confirms the true meaning of the song, which is peace between people and the world. People sang it knowing what the song meant and hoping it would change something. It showed pride and faith in humanity. This song will forever be an amazing, compelling classic that will never need to be changed. The lyrics and the meaning that were written by John Lennon in 1971 were the best they will ever be. Even though 1971 and 2015 are two completely different time periods, the meaning of the song will stay the same. This song will always be about world peace and imagining what the world would be like without borders, religions, conflict, and much more. There is only one meaning to this song and no one can ever change what John Lennon created. 	John Lennon was one of the greatest musicians to ever live and his talent was demonstrated in his song ‘Imagine’. This song highlighted significant world conflicts and unrest that were taking place at this time. This is what captured the hearts of listeners. It made people realize if you accept everyone for who they are instead of their religion or culture, everyone can live in harmony. John Lennon stated in the song ‘Imagine’: “You may say I’m a dreamer, but I’m not the only one. I hope someday you can join us. And the world will live as one” (AZ Lyrics). As society becomes more and more complicated, if we can share the same dream then we can make this dream a reality. “Changes” by 2Pac	Throughout 2Pac’s music career, he served as a very influential figure to people during his lifetime as well as today. 2Pac was especially influential to African Americans that were dealing with oppression during this time period. His music accurately articulates this struggle that these people had to deal with during their lives and his music is still very relatable and applicable to problems in our society today. For many people, 2Pac was seen as more than just a rapper; he was seen as a poet and a hero to many people for his leadership he showed in his songs. 2Pac was always seen as a leader because of his strong influences by people in his life, such as his mother, who was a strong leader in the Civil Rights Movement. After he died on September 13, 1996, 2Pac was remembered by his family, friends, and fans as an artistic genius and a prophetic speaker that exposed the truth to his people for the world to see. His death was a tragedy to the world, but his poetic genius and influence and his music will continue to impact the world as time goes on. In 2Pac’s song “Changes”, he discusses many different cultural and social issues within his community and has had a major impact on the cultural and social changes we have seen today.	2Pac had many important influences in his life and it contributed to his music and influence that he had on people. The name 2Pac was named after a Peruvian leader by the same name who led a civil rights rebellion during the same time period. “Tupac Amaru” also means “Shining Serpent” and Shakur means “Thankful to God” (Inquisitr). 2Pac’s name itself tells the story of his life as well as describes the kind of person he was to his fans. One of 2Pac’s biggest influences was his mother, Afeni Shakur, who was a famous member of the civil rights activist group The Black Panthers. Afeni was very close to 2Pac throughout her entire life, and despite her struggles with drug addiction and being on welfare her whole life, 2Pac stuck close to her throughout his entire life (Inquisitr). This lifestyle that his mother was stuck in had an impact on 2Pac growing up and it described how growing up in the ghetto molded him into the artist that he was. In his song “Changes” he makes several references to Civil Rights related issues about discrimination of police officers against black African males. The quote “Cops give a damn about a negro? Pull the trigger, kill a nigga, he’s a hero. Give the crack to the kids who the hell cares? One less hungry mouth on the welfare” (azlyrics) accurately illustrates how 2Pac believes the police do not care about the safety and health of African Americans. He says that the police don’t care if black people end up addicted to crack and end up killing themselves from it because it’s less money that has to be used to pay for their welfare. 2Pac talked about many other civil rights related issues such as gender inequality, crime, and sexism in his music that related to the poverty that everyone grew up with, as well as the mistreatment of women by men during this time. All of these things were a big influence on 2Pac’s life and he made a very noticeable impact on the community when he exposed these problems to the public.	During the time “Changes” was released, it was a shock to everyone that heard it because it was easy to relate to for all of his community that grew up in the ghettos and had to deal with the rough lifestyle of a dangerous environment. This song was so relatable and inspiring to the people because of 2Pacs ability to maintain a sophisticated rhyme as well as integrate social issues that were related to everyone in some shape or form (Chadmpos.blogspot). “Changes” is a song that is catchy but at the same time opens your eyes to the shocking truth of the world. 2Pac does this in a way that shows his poetic skill as well as his own experiences with oppression in his life. The line “wake up in the morning and I ask myself, is life worth living? Should I blast myself?” displays the irony he uses in his song to show how the world deals with their problems in their rough environment on the streets. He reveals how people resort to stealing, murder, and drugs to cope with their problems and fears they are dealing with. All of these things are issues that need change and 2Pac was admired for exposing these issues to the world so that changes could be made. Whether this song had an impact or not when it was published, it served as an example to the world that there needs to be changes if we’re going to end poverty and stop oppression. If something is not done to stop this oppression and poverty, we will never move forward as a society. If we don’t make changes, people in the ghettos will continue to resort to crime and fighting to survive each day, living off of whatever they can get, regardless of what they have to do for it.	One of the biggest qualities that 2Pac had that made him stand out to people is his ability to relate to the kind of lifestyle that his friends, family, and fans were dealing with. He grew up in the ghettos just like other normal people did. He grew up with his friends being killed and was exposed to crime in almost every day life. He grew up trying to get enough money each day to eat and survive in the poverty filled life that he had. He grew up feeling depressed and hopeless feeling that nothing would change in his life. 2Pac was making these songs to reach out to his community that he grew up in and give them a guiding a voice to get through the struggles that they dealt with every day. He was able to give hope to those that were struggling in their lives, as well as expose to the world the harmful things that people in the ghettos were exposed to/ had to do to survive. The best way to make an impact in people and their own lives is by relating to them at their level and seeing things from their perspective. 2Pac displays this well in his song “Changes” with his references to civil rights, police oppression, drugs, violence, and poverty. With all of these problems, 2Pac is able to relate and reach out to his community which gives his music more meaning to the people than any other artist. 	Without the influence of 2Pac and his music during his generation, we may not have ever seen any changes in the oppression felt by African Americans against police and society. During 2Pac’s life, civil rights movements were a very popular movement that were aiming at making changes in society. While these civil rights movements were effective in accomplishing their goals, 2Pac was a big role model to these movements and really made a change in how people viewed the civil rights movement. People started to realize the problems that African Americans were dealing with during this time because of his music. He was able to reach out and make an even bigger impact on top what these groups were already trying to accomplish. Oppression today could be much worse than it actually is today if it had not been for 2Pac’s music and influence on his community. 2Pac’s message in changes was directed at the entire world, and the song does a good job or portraying the problems in society to the world and in making a difference. Although there is still some oppression felt, 2Pac still stayed hopeful that times would change and that eventually we would end the oppression felt by his community as a whole.	The song “Changes” made a tremendous impact on African Americans lives and nothing had reached out to the people during this time as much as his song did. 2Pac used his poetic genius to represent the problems in his society in a way that everyone could relate to him. Even if you weren’t black, everyone during this time period heard and understood his message and looked to him as a hero for fighting against civil rights related issues. Everyone realized that there needed to be change when this song was released, and that the change they needed was something that would transform the lives of millions dramatically in the future. There was almost no critical judgment of 2Pac’s message in Changes, and for almost everyone it was a song that everyone then realized there needed to be a change in the ways of society.After 2Pac was killed, his death had a devastating effect on his community, fans, friends, family, and the world. 2Pac had a major impact on music, especially hip hop, and his legacy has continued to inspire musicians to this day. Rap and hip hop have evolved in a variety of ways, largely in respect to 2Pac. 2Pac had the ability to inspire others to achieve their goals and dreams and fought for racial equality throughout the world. Apart from him inspiring musicians, he has been mentioned in a variety of songs and interviews of hip hop and rap artists. One rapper that referenced to 2Pac was Ice Cube in an interview with ESPN about Richard Sherman’s comments during a football game. He quotes “You know, Tupac said ‘thug life’ and everybody feels like if you come from those areas you must be like Tupac, thug life, and it ain’t true.” This reference shows the misconception of people with 2Pac’s references to being a thug and how a “thug’s life” is not necessarily directed at everyone that grows up in a ghetto neighborhood. Ice Cube talks about how the word thug has a very negative connotation nowadays and it does not have the same meaning as it used to have when 2Pac wrote the song “Thug life” (Hiphopdx/ Ice Cube). 2pac is viewed as an idol by Ice Cube and he has had a big influence on his music. Another artist that was influenced by 2Pac’s music is American songwriter Jhene Aiko. In an interview, she talked about how she has been a fan of his music ever since she has been older. She got into him for his poetry, something that is strongly displayed in “Changes” with his poetic style of relating to his community. “Changes” literally made changes to society and it exposed the problems dealing with racism in the world. Jhene Aiko sets out to do what 2Pac did, and that is exactly what she wants to do with her music: help people and change the world (Hiphopdx/Jhene Aiko).	With the several social and cultural issues that 2Pac identified in his song “Changes”, he has been a significant musical figure to his community and our community today. 2Pac exposed to the world what no one had done before and his influence was powerful, but there are still changes that can be made today. Racial inequality is still existent in our lives, whether noticeable or not, and it is not right for people to be treated lower than anyone else. 2Pac’s song “changes” was the first stepping stones toward ending racial inequality. It is our job to finish his job and end racial inequality forever. Racial inequality is something that no one should have to deal with, and it is something that 2Pac made a dramatic effect in changing with his music. With all of the people that 2Pac has influenced, he will continue to live on in our lives and will continue to make an impact in ending racial inequality in our present day lives.Strange FruitDiscrimination and racism was a huge effect in society, which was a cause of why the song “Strange Fruit” was created. This song is about lynching in the south of the United States. Which Lynching isn’t just some ordinary hanging, it involved the torture, degradation, and the humiliation of black people.  It took place in the early twentieth century during the civil rights movement. It was actually written by a white Jewish communist named Abel Meeropol. Meeropol is a graduated from Dewitt Clinton in 1921. He taught English there at Clinton for 17 years. He was also an intellectual poet and a social activist who knew right from wrong. Even though Abel was a Jewish communist, he was strongly against racism period. It didn’t really matter the race, but at the time blacks were the most tortured. In the late 1930’s, after viewing a gruesome picture of a black person being lynched, Meeropol was convinced to write the poem to express his thoughts. Once said in Abel’s photograph, it "haunted him for days.” Before Billie Holiday, Meeropol had played the song Strange Fruit for a New York club owner, who had eventually given it to Billie Holiday to perform. Billie Holiday was a natural performer who had more than 30 singles that were considered in the top 20 in her era.  Despite her songs being popular at the time, she was still not a mainstream star. It is crazy how a word was mention about her publically.  Strange Fruit was the answer to that.  Although, none of her previous songs were anything like this song. This song strange fruit gives off a very uncomforting message.  This song affected herself as along with other people. It provided a major jump in Holiday’s career, making her popularity sky rocket. 	Billie Holiday was the perfect person to perform this song for many reasons. I say this because the way she sang the song, you can clearly tell that she put feeling and emotion into it. Also by hearing her song and knowing what the song is about, you are able to put yourself in those oppressed people in the south shoes. She was able to add life and strength to a poem that was already powerful. Another reason that Holiday was the best choice to perform the song because when Meeropol performed the song, it didn’t really get any recognition, but when Billie Holiday sung it publically, his song reached millions of people. It is so unique how the lyrics in the song doesn’t mention at all about lynching but yet it’s so clear to know what the song was explaining.The way the song opened up was flawless. It gave us the word strange in the verse. “Southern trees bear strange fruit” was in the first line of the poem. The word that stands out the most is Strange. It lets the audience know that whatever that is happening in the poem is either abnormal or not right. After hearing this song, the listeners would understand that this hate, racism should not be occurring. Not only using the word “strange” was smart but also using the word fruit. I believe the author used this word to implant a certain image in our head and allowing us to compare with the situation present. He wanted us to picture something beautiful and sweet and compare it with Africans and African Americans. Fruit is something that can look good on the outside but on the inside it can be rotten. That’s what he was implying with strange fruit, that they’re beautiful and that they are meant to be grown on trees and not human beings. “Blood on the leaves and blood at the roots”, this quote is giving us a pretty image and merging it with something horrific.With the powerful lyrics and strong voice of the woman, this combine inspired African Americans to fight for their rights. The beauty and strength expressed by Holiday was able to draw the attention not only for the African Americans but also the white Americans. She used the tactical skill of ethical appeal. Meaning she was able to relate to the song that she was singing.  It is more believable when you have experienced it firsthand. Therefor for it looked and felt real. People was able to feel what she felt. Not too long after Billie performed the song, Rosa Parks protested and refused to take a seat at the back of the bus after being told to do so. Rosa Parks’ refusal to sit in the back got popular and encourage many more people to fight. Without this song being played to the world to hear, none of this would’ve happened. This proves the effects that the song has on huge impact on society. This is song is still today affecting society. Kanye West a very popular hip hop and R&B singer who named a song “Blood on the leaves” which came from her first line in the song. He even used her voice for the course saying “blood on the leaves” and using her voice in the introduction of his song saying “Strange fruit hanging from the popular tree”. His song came out in 2014 last year, which is very recent. Which shows how much this song is an impact to modern day life.  Kanye West didn’t only use this song; it was used by numerous of other artist, novelist, and other creative works. Billie Holiday received countless numbers of awards and many other recognition for her music years after her death.  In 1972, in the group called Motown, Diana Ross, who was once a lead singer, she played the role of Billie in the movie “Lady Sings the Blues”. Which brought up a new interest in Holidays past.  And many of her songs along with “Strange Fruit” have been recruited into the Grammy Hall of Fame.  She has also received Grammys in the history album “Giants of Jazz”.  In 1978, the song was placed in the Germany hall of fame. There were awards from both Germany and America. Even though the song Strange Fruit was mainly about lynching but it made relations to other problems that was not only happening in the past but also the present. The major issue that is still going on today, which is racism. It isn’t as strong as back then but it’s still occurring. Because of the song being created, people were emboldened to fight which made racism decrease. At first Billie Holiday didn’t want to sing the song because she knew about the troubles that the song would attract. So a man who helped convince her to sing the song also persuaded her to close all her shows with the song “Strange Fruit”. The fact that a Jewish communist wrote this poem to protest against inhumane racism shows enormous the problem of discrimination is. Knowing he’s a communist, which is a theory or system of social organization based on the holding of all property in common, actual ownership being ascribed to the community as a whole or to the state, it is crazy to believe he actually helped fight for black rights. Miller says:“He was surprised to learn the song was written by a white Jewish guy from the Bronx. “Strange Fruit," he says, took extraordinary courage both for Meeropol to write and for Holiday to sing.”Even other people were able to see the ridiculousness within the situation. It posed people with questions. Some even wondered was he really a communist from the beginning.	Strange Fruit was a gateway to positive changes. It provided us modern day people with the common comfort. This comfort is peace. Today there are no lynching, beating of African American slaves, torturing, all of that has been abolished. Not only it provided us with peace, but it had also supplied us with diversity. Without this we wouldn’t have been able to experience all of things we already experience. For an example, without making this song, which helped support the abolishment of slavery, other people in this world would not have received the full effects and impacts African Americans have made. Our culture is well known in today’s society and people from different cultures are experiencing it now. The foods, dances, songs, religion and vice versa. 	The biggest achievement that she accomplished is the consequence and the effect of the song “Strange Fruit”. African Americans back in the slave days were once slaves, but are now free. The song was able to reach deep down in people’s hearts and corrupt their previous feelings into feelings that eventually changed the world permanently.   Can “Changes” Change?	A famous rapper making an entire career out of six short years, gunned down at the age of 25 only to become a legend. Tupac Shakur, an extremely successful artist that sold millions of records, deviated from the norms made by previous rappers, who only rapped about the gangster lifestyle, and instead wrote songs about important topics such as racism and Black Nationalism. His lyrics were smart and clever, and his meaningful songs like “Changes,” are easy to follow and understand. Tupac was an outstanding musician because of his other talents including poetry and acting. This helped Tupac with lyrics and performance in live settings. Tupac was raised under the Black Panther and Black Nationalism ideals by his activist mother who was a drug addict and moved him around until he enrolled in a school for the arts in Baltimore. He got his start in the music career when they moved to California in 1988 where he became a background dancer and vocalist for the group Digital Underground. In 1991 he released his first single “Brenda’s got a Baby,” from the album “2Pacalypse Now;” “Keep Ya Head Up” was 2Pac’s first revolutionary song. The song was about how a woman might have troubles being a single mother. At the time, talking openly about such topics was unheard of, and in a public setting, to millions of people, this was even more unsettling. The next revolutionary song was “Changes.” Many reviews and analyses have come out on Tupac Shakur’s song “Changes.” Although the song “Changes” was written over 2 decades ago, the messages and ideals are still prevalent today.The song “Changes” was recorded in 1992 but was not released until after his death. This was not an uncommon occurrence. Tupac was working on multiple songs when he died and had many finished songs that just weren’t released yet. All sources agree that one of the topics the song is about and stands against, is racism in and around the 1990’s when this song was written. Tupac experienced many forms of violence throughout his life. Some Tupac interpreted as against him solely because of his skin color. One instance of his unfair treatment is, according to Alleyezonme.com, Tupac filed an assault charge against a police officer because he brutally beat him for jay walking. Another example of this abuse would be Tupac’s story of the two drunk cops harassing him for no reason and shooting at the car Tupac was driving around midnight. These stories could have and probably just reinforced his beliefs that black people were being oppressed. Tupac was very passionate about racism and believed in Black Nationalism. Black Nationalism can be described as “The recognition of cultural and racial commonality and a call to racial solidarity. From a social stand point, Black Nationalism deals with the proposition that an oppressed people must first cherish a friendly union with themselves” (Harris 1). Reading the lyrics of the song “Changes” carefully, it is easy to pick out the many times he reference Black Nationalism and calls for his people to unite against the oppression. 	The website, Lyrics interpretations, says the song describes racial profiling, poverty, and racism affecting the African American population.  The analysis says 2Pac uses the song to call for changes to be made in order to fix these issues. The website follows the song line by line and finds the meaning in each line without looking at the big picture. The analysis says in response to the first line that no changes were made during the civil rights movement. The analysis then decides that in the first stanza Tupac directly connects being black and being poor, being hungry and causing crime, and finally, police brutality and being black. The second stanza according to Lyrics interpretations, is about why no changes have been made even after the civil rights movement. The lyrics of the verse convey that the African American population has not been able to unite, therefore no progress has been made towards change. The reason for the lack of unity lies within the individualistic personalities of the population. The personalities of the population have been forced to evolve into individualism in order to survive and support for their families, due to the rough world the African Americans live in, therefore not using their time for a greater cause. In the verse, Tupac explains that people have the option to break from the current culture and the past, but instead, they choose a life of crime. Tupac repeats the word “we” throughout the first two verses of the song.  According to the analysis, he used the word to symbolize the unity between the African American populations. Tupac drops his unity theme in the final verse because no one so far has united to fight. He then explains through the lyrics that he must follow suit with his fellow African Americans because he cannot fight alone and he must do what’s best for him. I believe the there are three issues Tupac touches on in his song “Changes.” Each one of his stanzas stand for a different issue; the first issue he raps about is poverty among the African American population. Tupac mentions himself being so hungry he is looking to steal someone’s purse in order to provide food for himself. Then in a later line in the first paragraph 2Pac raps, “Give ‘em guns step back watch ‘em kill each other.” I think this line is describing a “dog eat dog,” “fend for yourself” kind of world he believes black people are trapped in. This world black people are trapped in Tupac believes has been created by both white and black people. White people have created this world through racism and segregation. Black people have stayed in this world because they are seemingly forced to commit crimes to survive and have not yet united to break free of the oppressed world. The second verse I believe is about the call that has been made to unite and change the culture the African American people live in. The call seems to be described as unanswered in the song because Tupac does not mention any successful changes or large scale unity. A failure to answer this call leads Tupac to abandon his fight and hope to become a martyr once he dies. The third verse leaves out two very interesting words, “we” and “change.” On a poetic note the two words missing fit together well (“we change”) and because they are missing we can derive that “we change” did not happen, or no change was made. The lyrics of the last stanza describe Tupac abandoning his cause due to the lack of support. I believe Tupac knew of his fame and permanent mark on the music industry and the racism fight, and as long as he stood by his beliefs until the end, he would become a martyr similar to Martin Luther King Junior. Ignoring the lyrics, the tone of his song is very aggressive during the verses, but much more relaxed in the choruses. Tupac speaks quickly and uses lots of dark language to express his feelings in the verses. I think this is because he is passionate about the cause and is pleading and asking for help. The choruses seem to be more relaxed because he is explaining simply what he believes, and why he thinks we need the change. The music in the background of the rap has a very heavy bass and also is aggressive to match the tone of the lyrics and his voice. The added bass adds intensity to the song and excites the listener. The responses to the song tie directly to Black Nationalism because the song is about coming together for a greater cause. Tupac was raised on the Black Nationalism ideal and it shows in the song. Tupac’s solution to the issue of the failure of civil rights is to unite again as one, not individuals, and conquer the problem, very similar to the first attempt in the sixties. He realizes that it isn’t the right time for another civil rights movement and explains that at this time a movement would not work, and he is disappointed it wouldn’t. Hoping that his song would help the African American population have something in common and rise to answer the call made through the song, Tupac tries to be the center piece for a second civil rights movement even if it means after his death.  The song was a success in the music world but a failure in the Tupac’s grand scheme. Today the song has not united people to make a change. Instead the song has provided common entertainment to everyone. The song failed because Tupac had been killed before he was able to release the song and he couldn’t ride the song to a movement to end racism and bring equality. The Song needed a powerful leader to push the message and unite the African American population, but when Tupac was killed, he was remembered for his musical abilities not as much the topics he pushed and was passionate about. Today the most recent unity of black people to make a change would be the police brutality cases such as the choking of Eric Garner in New York. The news does not cover a black person killing another black person, but when a white person kills a black person or vice versa, the media jumps all over it. This in and of itself is racism, pointing out the difference in race between the parties in a crime that is committed every day. The week that Trayvon Martin was killed, 66 black people in the city of Chicago alone were killed by other blacks. Tupac mentions this radical media difference in his song when he raps “Cops give a damn about a Negro pull the trigger, kill a nigga, he’s a hero.” This line clearly demonstrates the views twenty years ago and the views today have not changed. Black on black crime is no problem while white on black, or black on white crime make the news every time. Although the song “Changes” was written with the intention of erasing racism and uniting the African American population of America to make a change in their culture, was the song successful in accomplishing these changes? The song connects our decade with that of the ninety’s with the same issues black people face. The song bridges the twenty year gap, giving us the opportunity to stand with Tupac and make a change. We recently have seen millions of African Americans stand together and voice their opinions all across the country in the media, is it possible now is the time when Tupac and his song “Changes” could have led us to make the change? Permeable Concrete and Asphalt	Permeable concrete, asphalt, and pavers have been popular topics in the debates between civil and environmental engineers over the past decade.  Permeable pavement is defined as a surface barrier, used for roadways, sidewalks, bikeways, parking lots, or public squares, that allows water to infiltrate small pores in the surface and reach the soil below.  In-lab tests have proved this product successful and safe, but real world test results have provided researchers with multiple problems and failures.  Most of the real world test have been run in cities and suburbs with high traffic volumes and sewer systems already in place, but after looking at all the issues, I think researchers should change their focus to rural areas with dirt or gravel roads that experience less traffic and have no runoff control systems already in place, like sewers.  This would allow them to gather more real world results while creating safer, more reliable driving surfaces in these rural areas.	Permeable asphalt and concrete are big new ideas in the civil engineering field that are starting to be used more and more as new tests are proving these products to be successful, but many engineers are also finding downfalls to this new idea.  Dr. P.J. Vardanega from the University of Bristol suggest that the test results from lab experiments and test results from real world usage of this new concrete and asphalt do not have the same, or even similar, overall results.  Others in the field agree that this product should be used in smaller applications first in order to get more accurate real world results before they move to bigger projects like highways and bridges.  C.D. Wright from the American Society of Engineers believes permeable concrete and asphalt will be a great way to prevent further erosion from storm runoff but he seems to think that it is not necessary to rip up old roads and parking lots and repave them with this new surface.  Other researches see this concrete as a great way to control runoff and erosion in rural areas that have gravel or dirt roads.  They believe this could be a good place to lay down this new pavement since there is less vehicle traffic in these areas and a more necessary use for water runoff control.  The major cities and suburbs already have sewer systems in place and water control plants that deal with the usual runoff but in areas where this is still a problem, instead of redesigning the sewer systems, engineers see this permeable concrete as a better solution once all the tests and results are reviewed.  After doing further research and getting a better understanding of the argument, I noticed most researchers in this debate overlooked this idea of using permeable concrete and asphalt in rural areas.  I agree that using permeable concrete for rural roads first would be the best way to get real world results while helping the areas that need new road surfaces and water runoff control the most.  Using permeable asphalt in rural areas that only have gravel or dirt roads will still allow water to percolate through the road surface while preventing erosion of the road’s surface after heavy rainfalls.	Concrete is something many people do not think about very often, but it affects our daily lives more than people can imagine.  Roads, sidewalks, parking lots, and highways overlay much of our world’s surface which creates an imbalance in the natural ecosystem and leads to many problems including erosion, flash floods, water table depletion, and the pollution of water systems (Balogh).  Today’s concrete and asphalt are barriers that prevent water from soaking into the ground and allowing for natural ecosystem regulation.  Many engineers are currently testing and using permeable concrete in order to help solve this major environmental problem.  Permeable concrete and asphalt are new materials that allow water to seep through to underlying soil instead of redirecting the runoff into complex sewer systems that empty into our rivers and streams.  This helps refill local watershed systems and eliminates the need for traditional storm water management systems like retention ponds and sewer systems.	Although there are many environmental advantages to using this new product, there are technical problems that provide many disadvantages that originate from varying runoff volumes, pollutant load, weight and traffic volumes, siting, climate, and cost to name a few (Hein).  All of these are major downfalls with permeable concrete in urban areas but none of them really affect the use of this product in rural areas.  Many of these issues originate from over population in an area which is why a rural setting is a safer place to test permeable concrete and asphalt in order to provide researchers with more real world results while dealing with fewer variables.Runoff volume is an issue because permeable concrete is not designed to soak up all the water that lands on it, so in urban areas it is made to hold water in its pores while the soil drains its water down to the water table and allows more water from the concrete to penetrate.  Because of this downfall, the sewer system will still need to be used and maintained in cities and suburbs therefore defeating the purpose of tearing up the concrete in place now and repaving the roads with a permeable pavement.  In rural areas, with gravel and dirt roads, permeable concrete will help prevent erosion both on and off the road by allowing the same or slightly more water to soak into the earth under the road surface while eliminating the impact erosion has on the road’s surface.  This erosion prevention creates safer driving conditions in these areas because residents will not have to deal with rutted roads after storms or rainfall.According to Deo, Sumanasooriya, and Neithalath from Clarkson University, pollutants like oil, salt, sand, or other particles found on roads can obstruct the pores in permeable concrete or asphalt causing the surface to become impenetrable like normal concrete or causing faster road cracking.  This is a major problem in urban areas because these particles and pollutants are widely used or spilled on the roads in cities and suburbs causing the permeable concrete or asphalt to become impermeable which defeats the purpose of using it.  In the country or farmland, most roads are never salted before a snowstorm and fewer cars drive on these roads so less oil and other car fluids are spilt onto the roads.  Because of this, pollutants would cause very little clogging of the surface pores and the permeable surface will stay functional longer.Permeable concrete and asphalt are currently not as durable as impermeable surfaces which calls for more frequent maintenance in highly populated areas.  This goes back to Dr. Vandanega’s claim that “real world test are not providing the same results as in-lab test.”  Cities, with the constant stop-and-go traffic and sharp turns, would need constant maintenance to keep the driving conditions safe using permeable road surfaces.  Country roads are usually long, straight roads that run parallel to one another with an occasional perpendicular road that connects them.  This means there is no stop-and-go motion and much fewer right angle turns along with a huge decrease in car traffic which would allow for very little upkeep and maintenance on these permeable surfaces.Siting is another factor that affects the usefulness of permeable pavements.  Hein and Schaus mention this issue in their paper, “Permeable Pavement Design and Construction: What Have We Learned Recently”, when they discuss slope angles and the efficiency of permeable concrete.  Once the angle of the slope exceeds twenty percent, the water flows too quickly for the absorbent characteristics of permeable concrete to take affect and it acts similarly to normal concrete or asphalt.  This causes problems on highways entrance and exit ramps as well as suburb streets because they have a variety of terrains so roadways would have to be part permeable and part impermeable.  Siting issues are less of a problem in rural areas because most roads run alongside the flat fields of crop.  This would allow for the entire stretch of road to be paved with a permeable surface instead of switching back and forth between different driving surfaces.One thing that everyone thinks about is the cost difference between using permeable concrete verse normal impermeable concrete.  Prices will vary from site to site but permeable pavements usually cost about two or three times that of normal pavements (Mack).  This cost comparison does not take into account for installation and upkeep cost of sewer systems or other runoff control systems necessary when using an impermeable surface.  Because of this, the cost of permeable concrete and asphalt installation for both urban and rural areas ends up being much lower than the installation cost of impermeable surface and runoff control systems.  Rural areas have no need for sewer systems because they do not have runoff control systems now so permeable pavement would still cost more to install but their road maintenance cost would significantly decrease.  Two or three times a year, dirt and gravel roads need to be graded in order to smooth out the ruts and erosion caused by rainfall and traffic.  Having a more durable surface that acts like the dirt and gravel roads would cut down overall cost of maintenance in these rural areas.Permeable concrete and asphalt are still fairly new products in the civil engineering field and still have many issues surrounding there use in real world applications, but these problems could be tested in rural areas like farmland and the countryside to provide researchers with more accurate real world results.  These areas usually only have gravel or dirt roads which experience erosion issues from rainfalls or traffic.  A road surface like permeable concrete or asphalt, which allows for water to percolate through it like a gravel or dirt road, is more durable and needs less maintenance than the current road surfaces and would be the safest and cheapest way to improve the driving conditions in rural areas.  Many of problems researchers are experiencing with permeable concrete in urban areas would have little to no effect on the rural area roads which would help them gather more real world results on a smaller scale while providing a better driving surface for the residences in these rural areas who are used to bumpy, dusty car rides.The Economist’s Struggle Does minimum wage lead to unemployment?  Many people all over the country have debated this for many years.  Economists and citizens themselves have talked this over and these groups have totally different views over what. According to Economists, raising the wage will make it more expensive to hire younger and low-skill workers.  In this essay, I will be focusing on the economic stand point of this discussion.   Many people assume that if you raise the minimum wage then it will help the country and that more people will be able to live off of their minimum wage, but if you look at it from the economic stand point then the higher the minimum wage is, the higher the unemployment is in the country.  This is shown in the graph below.In this essay, I will be covering the side that raising minimum wage will lead to increased unemployment according to what is stated in economics.  As seen in the graph above, if minimum wage were to rise, then unemployment would rise.  However, even after this many citizens believe that raising minimum wage would help.The minimum wage was first created by congress in 1938 and has been raised 22 times since it has first been created (Stevenson).  Times have changed since the minimum wage was first created and with these times the prices have changed as well, but when you raise the minimum wage too much or too often then it make things unstable and can make businesses spend more money and cause them to over price what it is that they sell.  Take for example Pizza Hut, They have several substitutes, such as papa johns or dominos, if pizza hut raises their minimum wage then they will have to raise prices and if that happens then people will not want to buy from them anymore and just go somewhere else.  This will cause Pizza to possibly go out of business.  Ben Gitis shows through different graphs that states who only charge the minimum wage have less unemployment than states that do offer more than what the minimum wage is (Gitis).  “Minimum wage has risen in the past two years and nineteen states have raised it above the minimum” (Gitis).  Washington has the largest minimum wage of any state and they believe that it does not lead to unemployment at all (Gitis).  However “Washington is only one observation among several states that also have minimum wages above $7.25”; having only one state in a survey is not good enough to be considered a good survey (Gitis).  “Second, the approach ignores factors that could affect the labor market characteristics of a state and the state’s decision to raise its minimum wage” (Gitis).  I still have some questions, concerning Washington’s economy, about how are they able to stimulate the economy to the point that you can raise it so much.  Part of what I believe is that marijuana is legal in Washington and that could create many more jobs and much more money.Emily Chong attempts to prove that raising minimum wage does not increase unemployment through the story of how fast food workers were protesting for higher wages (Chong).  This article provides an overview of news stories seeming to suggest that “economists have decided a higher minimum wage will cause job loss”; however, later in the article they argue they have found, through research done by “Boston University”, that there is there is no correlation between increased wage and increased unemployment (Chong). Unfortunately this is wrong; the model I gave about Pizza Hut would be the same if you made it about McDonalds and other fast food restaurants. “Research by Princeton University economists David Card and Alan B. Krueger indicates that an increase in the minimum wage does not necessarily mean a loss of jobs and may actually lead to the creation of new ones” (Coughlin).  The model in which David and Alan present was first shown during Clinton’s presidency (Coughlin). “"If they are right," says Ronald G. Ehrenberg, an economist at Cornell University, "they have shown that simple supply-and-demand models don't work in the low-wage-labor market, where we would think they would work best" (Coughlin).  “Mr. Card and Mr. Krueger surveyed about 400 employers both shortly before and several months after New Jersey increased its statewide minimum wage from the federal minimum of $4.25 to $5.05 an hour” (Coughlin).  After the research, they found that unemployment did not change or lowered (Coughlin).  This model has since been disproven because of more and more substitutes (restaurants) that have entered into the fast food business and it is now widely known that higher wage does lead to higher unemployment.  This article helps me show my side.In a model with imperfect competition and multiple equilibria Clark models how an increase in the minimum wage can lead firms to reduce wages (and employment) (Clark).  “In a competitive labor market, a minimum wage increase raises wages to the new minimum wage level if they were initially below that level, with no change otherwise; the effect on employment can only be a reduction” (Clark).  To  put things more clearly, Clark says, and believes, that if the minimum wage is set at, let’s say, $5.00 and a company voluntarily raises it to $6.50 then that company’s profits will start to sink in the long run, and this is ultimately  what I am trying to explain as my side in this paper.“Barack Obama has long made income inequality a central theme of his second-term agenda” (Trickle-up).  “In his address to Congress on February 12th, he dealt with it from below, proposing to raise the federal minimum wage by 24%, benefiting, so the White House claimed, 15m low-wage workers” (Trickle-up). “America's minimum wage has long been low by international standards”, but if the U.S. were to raise it then we could also be losing more money in the long run.  This could possibly lead to the U.S. borrowing more money from other countries and put us farther into debt (Trickle-up). Congress changes minimum wage occasionally, “and the wage was last raised, to $7.25 per hour, in 2009” (Trickle-up). “Since then its real value has slipped back to where it was in 1998” (Trickle-up).  The money may have slipped back to what it was in 1998, but it seems like the author of this article would agree with me and other economists that raising  minimum wage would be nothing but trouble.Thomas Michl looked at the work that Card and Krueger had made and seemed to come up with an entirely different view (Finance).  “After examining the data already collected, Mr. Michl suggests the following possibility: that the minimum-wage increase left the overall number of workers employed roughly the same, but reduced their hours” (Finance).  If their hours were the reduced then there would have to be more workers to fill in for the reduced hours.  This makes me think that if their hours were reduced and the wage was increased then the money that they actually got would remain relatively the same or maybe reduced, depending on how many hours were reduced, and if this happens then the workers might want to find a new job that would pay the same and have better hours.  Then, it would just be in a constant circle.  Since this seems like a silly possibility, so it might be better not to increase minimum wage so that this will not happen.“The minimum wage is a bad idea that keeps coming back, despite the efforts of economists everywhere to kill it” (Henderson).  Economists hate minimum wage because it can destroy the jobs for the less skilled workers (Henderson).  “For every 20% increase in the minimum wage, most economists believe, employment of teenagers and young adults falls by about 2% to 4%” (Henderson).  This research was done by Henderson in 1998 and so it is safe to assume that it has risen to above the 4%.  This is why Economists wish to not raise the minimum wage; to keep this employment from falling anymore.In conclusion, many states, from the past to the present, have tried to raise their minimum wage with Economists trying to tell them to heed their warning. Unfortunately, many states have gone back and forth between wanting to raise minimum wage and wishing they hadn’t.  Minimum wage does lead to unemployment.  Legalization of Marijuana	On February 26th, 2015 at 12:01 a.m., our nation’s capital decided to legalize marijuana for medicinal and recreational use. During this discussion, there was significant political controversy which is typical in our nation’s capital. The mayor of Washington D.C., Muriel Bowser, made the brave discussion to legalize marijuana despite legal and political tension between her office and Congress. Congress stated that Mayor Bowser was being unlawful and would face “very serious consequences” on her decision to legalize marijuana. (New York Times) Regardless of legalities and threat of consequences, was Bowser right moving forward with her decision? With the legalization of marijuana, Bowser will now be able to add funding to Washington DC’s education fund. She will now be able to spend the funding on the addition infrastructure of the public school system. By legalizing marijuana, millions of dollars will additional revenue will be achieved. So, was she really making the wrong decision? I agree with her decision and this is why I think that marijuana should be legalized in the United States. 	 When advocating for the legalization of marijuana a couple of reasons arise. The first main topic is about the social factors of marijuana. In America, marijuana is perceived in many ways. Some have the belief that marijuana is an addictive drug that only does negative damage to your brain and body, while others believe that marijuana can cure diseases and benefit people. However, there are many stats to show that marijuana is not as bad as everyone think, and in some cases a healthy drug. First, the use of medicinal marijuana can control or even treat diseases such as Glaucoma, epileptic seizures, and multiple sclerosis. Although marijuana might not completely cure or treat these diseases, it will help prevent the disease from getting worse and make the symptoms less tolerable. For example, a professor at Virginia Commonwealth University gave marijuana to epileptic rats. While under the influence of marijuana, the rats did not show any symptoms for almost 10 hours. This helps support the medicinal use of marijuana.  Secondly, it is safe to compare marijuana with other legal drugs, specifically alcohol. There has been much debate about whether alcohol is safer than marijuana and vice versa. However, CNN did a study comparing alcohol consumption to weed consumption and the results were very compelling. It comes down to a very close margin, but in some sectors there is not enough conclusive evidence to show that marijuana is directly better or worse than alcohol. What is known is that marijuana can be used as a medicine, which alcohol cannot. Marijuana users are also known to be skinnier compared to beer-bellied alcohol consumers. Marijuana also leads to a significantly lower death rate than alcohol. (CNN) Lastly, I decided to review the public’s view of marijuana. In a study done by the Huffington Post, 49% of Americans said that they would vote to legalize marijuana while only 38% oppose. Also, 55% of Americans said that they would vote yes to legalize marijuana with the same statutes and laws as Colorado and Washington DC. However, even though that 49% of Americans believe that marijuana should be legalized this still leaves 51% of the population that are either against the legalization or not decided. We need to take this one step further and ask how legalization would affect our youth and our overall perception to other countries. The problem with substance abuse or consumption with America’s adolescents is an ongoing challenge. Kids make bad choices, they drink too much or they overdose on drugs, but studies show that the legalization of marijuana would not change the way adolescents are affected or would behave. Today, marijuana is illegal in almost every state and still adolescents still find a way to get it if they want it. By legalizing it, this creates an opportunity to increase law enforcement around those specific dispensaries to prevent underage possession of marijuana. The truth is that adolescents will still obtain marijuana if it is legal or illegal to them. If they want it, there will be a way to get it. Therefore, reflecting the decisions of American Adolescent culture would be simply absurd because there are many more contributing factors then whether or not marijuana is legalized. The social factors of the legalization of marijuana will significantly contribute to its overall journey towards legalization.	Throughout the legalization process, it will all start and end with the politics and whether or not there is legislation that can get passed. The laws in both Colorado and Washington DC will be heavily scrutinized by other state agencies in order to make the best decision for future laws.  The legalization of marijuana has been in the political press for years now and it is now finally starting to gain traction due to the recent choices at the state level. Despite the action in the state level, what about the federal level? The legalization of marijuana has never been taken to a federal level. However, on April 20th, there is a three page bill that would amend the Controlled Substance Act to exempt plants with a very low amount of THC, making them legal.(MSMD) This would be the first ever federal law that would allow any sort of medicinal marijuana. On the other hand, if this law was to pass how would it affect the United States? The answer is no one is certain. Medicinal marijuana has never been federally legalized throughout the United States so the effects of this law is anyone’s guess. In all likelihood, federally legalized medicinal marijuana is very far reaching and likely not to occur for many years. However, the legalization statewide is a very different topic. As we know, eight states have legalized marijuana medicinally and four states have legalized it medicinally and recreationally. All states have different backgrounds and morals. For example, Kansas is one of the most conservative state in the U.S. and they should not be required to do anything with marijuana if it is against their morals or beliefs of the state. (Marijuana Policy Project) On the other hand, Alaska was one of the first states to legalize marijuana because they viewed themselves as conservative but with a liberal strike. They thought that because of who they are that it would be best for their state to legalize marijuana recreational and medicinally. States need to look at what they think would be best for their situation and overall progression and success as a state. Also, the legalization of marijuana brings a very big monetary advantage. In Colorado’s first year of selling marijuana legally for recreational and medicinal use, they sold nearly $700 million. (Baca) Breaking it down even further, medicinal marijuana brought in $386 million and recreational brought in $314 million. (Baca) Also, Colorado ended up collecting a smooth $53 million in marijuana sales tax revenue. (Baca) This money can be used for schools, transportation, poverty, or anything that Colorado has designed for it. These figures show that marijuana gives a huge financial advantage to states and this may motivate additional politics due to these significant figures. A main component to politics is to track where the money is being spent, how the money is being brought in, and how can we use the money we have to create the best system for the people. With the legalization of marijuana in Colorado, this creates a whole new subsector to their economy and will only help them in the future. Also, states will look at Colorado’s financial success and have to decide if they want to get in on the pot of wealth. Overall, the politics of marijuana is very interesting and will continue to mold part of the way that Washington and America operates. 	In summary, I believe that marijuana should be legalized on a state level and that individual states should have final control on whether or not they would legalize it. Currently, the federal legalization of marijuana is too early to be considered because you have less than 20% of states that have legalized it either medicinally or recreationally. Until that number rises, any chance of legalizing marijuana federally would be very premature. The reason that I believe marijuana should be legalized is because even though it is a drug that harms your body, it doesn’t do as much damage as some other legal drugs such as alcohol. Also, I think legalizing marijuana throughout the state level would be the smartest and most efficient way to go. Right now, Colorado, Washington, Oregon, Alaska, and Washington D.C. have legalized marijuana both medicinally and recreationally. These states are our beta tests. We should observe the culture, politics, and social life of these states to determine if they really are heavily impacted by the legalization of marijuana. If this all goes well then more and more states can continue to legalize it. One thing that I wouldn’t want to see would be that states start legalizing marijuana just because of the tax benefits and the overall large sum of money the states get. This would cause states to legalize marijuana prematurely and could cause some pretty serious consequences. For example, if Missouri decided to legalize marijuana within the next year or so this would but Kansas in a very difficult position. Kansas would have both its east and west neighbors with legalized marijuana laws and this would affect Kansas because they would have to increase their border control to make sure there is no smuggling. In this case, if the border control was too much, Kansas could possibly legalize marijuana because they would cut on the border control and gain on making tax revenue. Overall, legalization of marijuana is something that I definitely believe in and I think it is something inevitable in our day of age. We just need to be careful with how Americans move forward with legalizing it.	Legalization of marijuana has been on the forefront of the political landscape in America for a couple of decades. For that amount of time, there has never been a political party that has been able to convince Congress and the rest of America to legalize. But in 1996, California was the first state to legalize medicinal marijuana use and then in 2012 Colorado and Washington legalized both medicinal and recreational marijuana. The last big landmark legislation was on February 26th, 2015 when Washington DC legalized medicinal and recreational marijuana. The legalization process keeps moving forward every day. First with the legalization of medicinal use in the 1990’s and now with the legalization of medicinal and recreational use in our nation’s capital. However, there are some critics that say that marijuana would still be bad for the United States. This can be overridden by information in studies proving that alcohol, a legal drug, is more dangerous to the public and the consumer than marijuana is. On top of that, the legalization of marijuana would add millions of dollars that could be directed toward make that community, county, and state better. This being said, Americans need to keep moving forward with the legalization of marijuana because not only is it dope, but it will take America to much higher places. 		 Economics: Legalization of Marijuana	With all of the social, political, and economic issues that are present today, marijuana legalization is an argument that sparks great debate and has had a great diversity of views on the subject. There are the people that think marijuana should be legal because of the right that we should have to ingest whatever we want into our bodies, and there’s the economic side of legalization. While both sides are important, the economic aspect of this issue is clearly more important in analyzing all of the effects that it will have on our country as a whole rather than effects it has on individuals. The economic aspect keeps morals and bias out of it and it only implicates the facts and statistics into it as a debate, whereas a moral debate would get nowhere with biased views and the inability to come to an agreement. Today, there are several states with some sort of legalization of marijuana, whether it’s medicinal or recreational, and it has brought all sorts of new ideas and movements toward a topic that could change our economy. The two states that have fully legalized marijuana for both recreational and medicinal use, Colorado and Washington, have seen great economic improvements and benefits from legalization. With the success of these states’ laws passed toward legalization, it could be the first stepping stone in changing societies views on legalization and may lead to legalization across the country in the future.	One of the basic economic concepts in markets is the idea that participants always maximize their own utility and maximize their profits along with this. This ties into marijuana legalization because without government restriction on the markets supply, the economy would be able to produce at a profit maximization level. This would only bring in profit to the marijuana dispensary businesses and it would generate maximum tax dollar revenue for the government. Along with this, traditional drug control treatments and laws do not restrict the supply of illicit drugs from the drug users, or the non- using population (Lagrange 507). Drug prohibition only targets the supply side of drugs and ignores the consumer’s side. Even with prohibition, it has no effect on the rate that marijuana is grown, sold, and consumed in our society and is therefore useless in fighting this war on drugs. This proves that the government is wasting tax dollars on funding federal drug administrations to criminate people for using marijuana because of the negligible return it brings (Lagrange 507). As far as the outcomes from good to bad range, there are almost all positive effects that help our economy with legalization. Positive outcomes range from tax dollar revenue, less government expenditure on drug administrations, medicinal purposes for a range of illnesses, decreased anxiety and stress from individuals, and an almost complete absence of black market sales within the community. All of these things are problems facing America today and legalization would ensure renovation of these problems. 	One question that has arisen, specifically toward non users, is why has legalization all of a sudden become such a political debate? Does this really have an effect on our society? In the economy aspect alone, Colorado generated over $1 million in its first day of legalized recreational marijuana alone, and the numbers are only continuing to rise (Monte). This is a far better return than the daily incomes of marijuana related crime prosecution and it serves to show that dispensaries do a better job of raising tax dollars than the government does of exploiting marijuana use for tax dollars. Since legalization in January 1st of 2014, there were 497 medical dispensaries and 292 retail dispensaries that were licensed by November of the same year, leading to an overall decline of black market sales (Monte). Black market sales are an enemy to dispensaries, and the government as well, and having government regulated dispensaries for sales of marijuana only further proves that legalization leads to a productive return for the economy if it is regulated and monitored accordingly. This end of the fight against black market crimes would lead to overall less crime and less spending on maintaining prison facilities and county jails. Less people in jail and prison leads to more productivity in an economy with more people working and less unemployment.	The biggest problem with marijuana being illegal, from an economic standpoint, is the increasing amounts of government expenditure on fighting these crimes for negligible returns. In the past from the years 1981 to 1994, the National budget for fighting drug crimes from a federal level increased from $1.5 billion to $13 billion. By increasing this budget, there were more returns as far as increase in revenue for the government from exploiting these crimes, but not equal to the rate that the budget was increased. This has led to an even bigger loss by governments spending on the war on drugs. Along with this, state and local drug arrests grew 59 percent from 1981 to 1986 and an additional 23 percent from 1986 to 1991 (Schulhofer). As the government expenditures for fighting drugs is increasing, it is an increased loss for our economy and it will only continue to get worse. While with marijuana being legal, the government would have more control over marijuana and its regulation and would not have to spend money on arresting and prosecuting individuals for marijuana related crimes. They would be able to inspect and monitor exactly how marijuana is grown and how it’s sold in order to prevent consumers from buying an unsafe product. This would cause overall less health problems and decrease the amount of emergency room visits (Wheat Law Library). Apart from government regulation, it is just flat upright unnecessary for the government to be arresting the public for marijuana consumption. Marijuana causes negligible effects on people’s ability to operate motor vehicles and has not seen to decrease productivity in workers after or before they are under the influence of marijuana (LaGrange 519). Therefore, it is completely unproductive to go after and prosecute these crimes for the very small effect they have on people’s abilities to function. Overall, there would be money better spent by the government funding dispensaries to grow and sell a safe, harmless product that can be consumed without unknown side effects from those products sold by drug dealers. The government would be spending money on regulating and monitoring dispensaries to ensure a safe product for users and this would bring less emergency hospital visits.But along with all changes in society, there are always negative effects. Increased availability to THC (Tetrahydrocannabinol, the main chemical active in marijuana) is associated with psychosis, anxiety, and depression symptoms. While this is a problem, this can be somewhat misleading because this is often coincident with other behaviors that may contribute to this health care. For example, the use of marijuana combined with alcohol causes an increased risk in motor vehicle accidents than either of the substances would alone(Monte). The leading problem with legalization from a macroeconomic standpoint is the difference in classifying a federal vs. a state crime against marijuana. On a federal level, you can still be arrested for consumption even if you are using marijuana in a legal state. This causes tension and problems for the states that have legalized marijuana because there is still discrimination from the federal government for a substance that is technically legal, but only on a state level. Therefore, people can be arrested or incriminated for these crimes by the Federal government in states like Colorado and Washington (Lagrange 513-514). A big problem from a health risk side of legalization, that affects the economy, is the increase in visits for pure marijuana intoxication at emergency hospitals. The reasons for these visits range from anxiety, panic attacks, public intoxication, vomiting, or other nonspecific symptoms that could be caused by marijuana consumption (Monte). While this is a problem, it is a very rare occurrence and it is estimated that there are only 1-2 visits a day for these sicknesses solely related to marijuana consumption. But with legalization, it is very important that for legalization to happen we must acknowledge this problem and make the public aware of these side effects to prevent this problem from growing. Another problem has been the uprising of experimentation with the use and production of THC in marijuana products. This has led to an increase in some somewhat similar effects such as cyclic vomiting syndrome and prevalence of burns, leading to more hospital visits for treatment of burns. This increase in burns has been mainly associated with the extraction of THC from marijuana plants using butane as a solvent and this poses a threat to some dispensaries credibility. This problem could be solved by more careful THC extraction and developing safer ways to perform this process, such as better lap equipment that is burn resistant or machines that could extract the THC without anyone being exposed to this process. The final major problem is with edible THC containing products. Typically, 10 to 30 mg is recommended for intoxication, depending on the user, but most edibles contain 100 mg of THC which leads to misinterpretation of how much to consume to feel the effects. This is very common with edible marijuana products and causes individuals to “overdose” and feel the effects of marijuana too harshly and can sometimes lead to dangerous side effects, like anxiety and panic attacks. One solution to this problem may be a capsule formulation that can be safely ingested without over consuming too much. This would prevent marijuana intoxication and would make the public more aware of the correct amount to consume when consuming marijuana products.	With all of these current laws that have legalized marijuana use, it may be the first step in legalizing marijuana across the country for an overall more efficient economy. There are too many benefits to legalization that outweigh the benign costs that it brings. Legalization will lead to economic progress with more tax dollars being generated that can be better spent, not wasted away on the federal drug administration fighting marijuana related crimes. The solution we should implicate in fighting these negative externalities of legal marijuana use should be a strong government regulation of marijuana production, sale, and possession by people ages 21 and older. We should very strictly implicate when specifically it is acceptable to be under the influence of marijuana and heavily monitor public usage in order to prevent any problems from overuse, or just use, to societies health. This is necessary in order to prevent further economic decline and stop the black market from growing too exponentially. With government regulation of marijuana consumption, we will see the future of our economy start to turn around and it could spark new ideas that could even further our economic growth.